TAFSIR IBN KATHIR 


(ABRIDGED) 


The Qur’an is the revelation of Allah’s Own Words 
for the guidance of His creatures. Since the Qur’an is 
the primary source of Islamic teachings, the correct 
understanding of the Qur’an is necessary for every 
Muslim. The Tafsir of Ibn Kathir is the most renowned 
and accepted explanation of the Qur’an in the entire 
world. In it one finds the best presentation of Hadiths, 
History, and scholarly commentary. 
Darussalam is proud to present for the first time this 
abridged version of Tafsir Ibn Kathir, which is free 
from unauthentic Hadiths. 


ch 


DARUSSALAM 


DARUSSALAM 


Publishers & Distributors 
Riyadh, Houston, New York, Lahore 


3) 4 ~ 


(aaDaqaimavyv) 
4IHLV> NGI 
disavl 


VOLUME 


Ry 
Oh. 


DARUSSALAM 


Ziv a eZ 
Pinger ieee 


sf 
—— 3 la, 


TAFSIR 
N KATHIR 


(ABRIDGED) 


VOLUME 1 


SS eet) 
ys tes ES a) 


aN a0. 23 
' DRX a2 
rs 4 rh tS pees ee Aiki pod ; 


At AIHA Circa ll) tO 
Verse 252 of! Surat Al-Baqgarah) 
ME SN hn hw SE ND LN lap led al | at alba) J 


ee et ek eet ed 


ABRIDGED BY 
A GROUP OF SCHOLARS UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF 


SHAYKH SAFIUR-RAHMAN-AL-MUBARAKPURI 


| 
4 | 


JPAING Poy SAL PAINE 
Publishers & Distributors 
Riyadh, Houston, New York, Lahore 


amen 


Lae = « 
Vewceyen 

ame heer 
TAFSIR IBN KATHIR 


(ABRIDGED) 
VOLUME 1 


Parts 7 and 2 - Surat Al-Fatihah to 
Verse 252 of Surat Ail-Bagqarah 


7 > SABRIDGED BY 
A GROUP OF SCHOLARS UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF 


SHAYRH SAFTUR-RAHMAN AL-MUBARAKPURI 


oo. 
DARUSSALAM 


DARUSSALAM 


Sean nei 
faeces 
(Dome 
TAFSIR 

IBN KATHIR 


(ABRIDGED) 
VOLUME 1 


Parts 1 and 2 (Surat Al-Fatihah to 
Verse 252 of Surat Al-Baqarah) 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED @ 45 six qibll 5 sis guca 
Second Edition: July 2003 


PRINTED IN LEBANON 


© Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, 2003 
King Fahd National Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Tafsir ibn Kathir/Imam Abu Al-Fida Ismail Ibn Kathir 
Sah-ur-Rahman Al-Mubarakpuri-Riyadh. 


696p., 14x21 cm. ISBN 9960-892-71-9 (Set). 


1-Qur’an-Commentaries 


227.32 de. 


II-Title 
1424/2816 


Legal Deposit no. 1424/2816 
ISBN 9960-892-71-9 (Set). 
9960-892-72-7 (Vol. 1) 


Head Office: P.O. Box: 22743, Riyadh 11416, K.S.A. Tel: 00966-01-4033962/4043432 Fax: 4021659 
E-mail: darussalam@awatnet.net.sa Website: http! www.dar-us-salam.com 


K.S.A. Darussatam Showrooms: 
Riyadh 
Olaya branch: Tel 00966-1-4614483 Fax: 4644945 
Malaz branch: Tel 4735220 F ax: 4735221 
*« Jeddah 
Tel: 00966-2-6879254 F ax: 6336270 
« Al-Khobar 
Tel: 00966-3-8692900 F ax: 00966-3-8691551 
VA.E 
¢ Darussalam, Shayjah U.A.E 
Tel; 0097 1-6-5632623 Fax: 5632624 
PAKISTAN 
« Darussalam, 36 6 Lower Mall, Lahore 
Tel: 0092-42-724 0024 Fax: 7354072 
e« Rahman Market, Ghazni Street 
Urdu Bazar Lahore 
Tel: 0092-42-7120054 Fax: 7320703 
U.S.A 
« Darussatam, Houston 
P.O Box: 79194 Tx 772779 
Te!: 001-713-722 0419 Fax: 001-713-722 0431 
E-mail: sales@dar-us-sitam.com 
¢ Darussalam, New York 
572 Atlantic Ave, Brooklyn 
New York-11217, Tal: 001-718-625 5925 
U.K 
« Darussalam International Publications Ltd. 
226 High Street, Walthamstow, 
London E17 7JH. Tel: 044-208 520 2666 
Mobile: 0044-794 730 6706 Fax: 0044-208 521 7645 
¢ Darussalam Intemational Publications Limited 
Regent Park Mosque, 146 Park Road, 
London NW8 7RG Tel: (1044-207 724 3363 
« Darussalam 
398-400 Coventry Road, Small Heath 
Birmingham, 810 OUF 
Ted: 0121 77204792 Fax: 0121 772 4345 
E-mail: info@darussalainuk.com 


Web: www.darussalamuk.com 


FRANCE 
« Editions & Librairie Essalam 
135, Bd de Ménilmontant- 75011 Paris 
Tél: 0033-01- 43 38 19 56/ 44 83 
Fax: 0033-01- 43 57 44 31 
E-mail: essalam@essalam.con 
AUSTRALIA 
« ICIS: Ground Floor 165-171, Haidon St. 
Lakemba NSW 2195, Australia 
Tel: 00612 9758 4040 Fax: 9758 4030 
MALAYSIA 
e 8D Books SON. BHD.-321 B 3rd Floor, 
Suria Kice 
Kuala Lumpur City Center 50088 
Tel: 00603-21663433 Fax: 459 72032 
SINGAPORE 
« Muslim Converts Association of Singapore 
32 Onan Road The Galaxy Singapore- 424484 
Tel: 0065-440 6924, 348 8344 Fax: 440 6724 
SRI LANKA 
¢ Darul Kitab 6, Nimal Road, Colombo-4 
Tel: 0094-1-589 038 Fax: 0094-74 722433 
KUWAIT 
« {slam Presentation Committee 
Enlightment Book Shop 
P.O. Box: 1613, Satat 13017 Kuwait 
Tel: 00965-244 7526, Fax: 240 0057 
INDIA 
e Islamic Dimensions 
56/58 Tandel Street (North) 
Dong, Mumbai 4000 009, India 
Tel: 0091-22-3736875, Fax: 3730689 
E-mail:sales@!RF.not 
SOUTH AFRICA 
* Islamic Da’wah Movement (IDM) 
48009 Qua!bert 4078 Durban,South Africa 
Tel: 0027-31-304-6883 
Fax: 0027-31-305-1292 
E-mail: idm@ion.co.za 


SSS Nica 


ied 


oo 


Laas IBN KATHIR 


(ABRIDGED) 
VOLUME 1 


Parts 1 and 2 (Surat Al-Fatihah to 
Verse 252 of Surat Al-Baqarah) 


ABRIDGED BY 
A GROUP OF SCHOLARS UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF 
SHAYKH SAFIUR-RAHMAN AL-MUBARAKPURI 


B. 


DARUSSALAM 


GLOBAL LEADER IN ISLAMIC BOOKS 
Riyadh e Jeddah e Al-Khobar « Sharjah 
Lahore « London « Houston e New York 


In the Name of Allah 
The Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful 


Publishers Note 


Tafsir Al-Qur’an Al-‘Azim, which is famous by the title Tafsir 
Ibn Kathir, by Al-Hafiz Abu Al-Fida’ Imad Ad-Din Isma‘l bin 
‘Umar bin Kathir Al-Qurashi Al-Busrawi (d. 774 H.), is the most 
popular interpretation of the Qur’an in the Arabic language, and 
the majority of the Muslims consider it to be the best source 
based on Qur’4n and Sunnah. This Arabic work spans three 
thousand and two hundred pages in four volumes. To cover all 
of the references, Ibn Kathir has also collected some weak 
Hadiths and Israelitish stories. Some repetitions also occur in it, 
as and when the topics required these. 

As Darussalam has made a policy to publish only such works 
which are based on Qur'an and authentic Hadiths we appointed a 
board of Islamic scholars to summarize Tafsir Ibn Kathir in the 
original Arabic language. Shaykh Abu Al-Ashbal Ahmad Shagif of 
Rabitah Al-‘Alam Al-Islami, Makkah, and Shaykh Safi-ur-Rahman 
Al-Mubarakpuri, Head of the Research Committee of Darussalam 
worked with a team of other scholars for about two years on this 
project. We published this summarized version in the Arabic 
language titled as Al-Misbah Al-Munir fi Tahdhib Tafsir Ibn Kathir. 

This summarized version was prepared for the sole purpose 
of translation into all the major languages of the world. First 
of all, it is being presented in the English language as it is the 
most widely written and spoken in the world. 

To translate a book in another language is a task requiring great 
skill, and when it comes to the translation of Tafsir and Hadith, 
then it becomes a greater responsibility, requiring the skills of 
both languages and the knowledge of religion and religious terms. 
The help, advice, guidance and cooperation of many persons was 
sought for the various steps of the project. The translation was 
done by Mr. Jalal Abualrub (USA), Mr. Nasir Khitab, his wife Mrs. 
Huda Khitab (Canada), Mr. Aqeel Walker (USA), Dr. Muhammad 
Al-Jibali (USA) and Mr. Sami Ayoub (USA). The translation was 
edited by Mr. Abu Khaliyl (USA), Mr. Muhammad Farooq 
(Pakistan), Mr. Abdul Ahad (India) Mrs. Jalal Abualrub (USA), Mr. 
Abdul-Mun‘m (Egypt), Mr. Sidheeque M.A. Veliankode (India), 
Qari Muhammad Iqbal (Pakistan), Mr. Shakil Ahmad As-Salafi 
(India) and Hafiz Abdul-Matin (Pakistan). Layout planning and 
computer programing in an advanced publishing software was 
voluntarily carried out by Mr. Muhammad Munawar (Pakistan). 


6 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


The typesetting and correction of manuscript was done by Mr. 
Abdus-Samad (India), Syed Ali Haider (India) and Mr. Hassan 
Ajami (Egypt). Some valuable suggestions were made by Mr. Al- 
Arabi bin Razduq (UK) and Mr. Omar Johnson (USA). 

We have tried our best not to include any weak Hadith in 
this presentation. All the authentic sayings of the Prophet #% 
have also been presented in the Arabic language along with 
diacritics. The only sections of the Arabic that were not 
translated are some discussions pertaining to Arabic words 
which were not pertinent to the English readers, such 
omissions are very few to mention. Topic headings were added 
throughout the Tafsir to help the readers better understand the 
discussion of the Verses of the Qur’an. The language and style 
adopted for the translation is very plain and simple. The 
translation of the meanings of the Verses is from the 
translation of Dr. Muhammad Tagqi-ud-Din Al-Hilali and Dr. 
Muhammad Muhsin Khan published by Darussalam. The 
editors have made some changes in it at some places where it 
was necessary to comply with the Tafsir. 

I am thankful to all the workers, helpers and advisers who 
cooperated with us in the completion of this great project. And 
I am especially thankful to Shaykh Safi-ur-Rahman Al- 
Mubarakpuri, who is a great scholar of the time and from 
whom all of us at Darussalam benefit seeking his advice and 
valuable suggestions regarding our research projects and 
problems. We have tried our best to make it a faultless work, 
but human weakness may render any error in it. We ask the 
readers to forgive us for such errors and to inform us of that 
in order to remove it from the following editions. 

In the whole project, the errors are from our side and from 
Satan while all the good is from the blessings of Allah. If the 
people benefit from this translation in the understanding of 
the Qur’an, we will consider it a great blessing and we pray to 
Allah for the best reward in the Hereafter. 


Abdul-Malik Mujahid 
General Manager 
Darussalam Publications 
Riyadh, March 2000 


Contents 


Publishers Note 

Important Guidelines about the Authenticity of the 
Reports and Quotations in the Tafsir of Ibn Kathir 
The Biography of the Author, Ibn Kathir 

Ibn Kathir’s Teachers 

Ibn Kathir’s Students 

Ibn Kathir’s Books 

Ibn Kathir’s Death 

Ibn Kathir’s Introduction 

The Sources for Tafsir 

Israelite Accounts and Tales 

The Tafsir of the Tabi‘in 

Tafsir by mere Opinion 

Explaining what One has Knowledge of, Silence otherwise 
The Makkan and Madinan Strahs 

The Number of the Qur’anic Aydt 

The Number of Words and the Letters of the Qur’an 
Dividing the Qur’an into Parts 

The Juzu’ or Chapter of the Qur’an 

The Meaning of Sarah 

The Meaning of Ayah 

The Meaning of Kalimah 

Does the Qur’4n contain non-Arabic Words? 

The Tafsir of Sarat Al-Fatihah (Chapter 1) 

The Meaning of Al-Fatihah and its Various Names 
How many Aydt does Al-Fatihah contain? 

The Number of Words and Letters in Al-Fatihah 
The Reason it is called Umm Al-Kitab 

Virtues of Al-Fatihah 

Al-Fatihah and the Prayer 

Reciting Al-Fatihah is required in Every Rak‘ah of 
the Prayer 

The Tafsir of Isti‘addhah (seeking Refuge) 

Seeking Refuge before reciting the Qur’an 
Seeking Refuge with Allah when One is Angry 

Is the Isti‘€dhah (seeking Refuge) required? 


8 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Virtues of the Isti‘dhah 

What does Isti‘4dhah mean? 

Why the Devil is called Shaytan 

The Meaning of Ar-Rajim 

Bismillah is the First Ayah of Al-Fatihah 
Basmailah aloud in the Prayer 

The Virtue of Al-Faétihah 

Basmalah is recommended 

before performing any Deed 

The Meaning of “Allah” 


The Meaning of Ar-Rahman Ar-Rahim - the Most Gracious, 


the Most Merciful 

The Meaning of Al-Hamd 

The Difference between Praise and Thanks 

The Statements of the Salaf about Al-Hamd 

The Virtues of Al-Hamd 

Al before Hamd encompasses all Types of Thanks 
and Appreciation for Allah 

The Meaning of Ar-Rabb, the Lord 

The Meaning of Al-‘Alamin 

Why is the Creation called ‘Alam? 

Indicating Sovereignty on the Day of Judgment 
The Meaning of Yawm Ad-Din 

Allah is Al-Malik (King or Owner) 

The Meaning of Ad-Din 

The Linguistic and Religious Meaning of ‘baddah 
The Merit of stating the Object of the Action before the 
Doer of the Act, and the Merit of these Negations 
AlL-Fatihah indicates the Necessity of praising Allah. 
It is required in every Prayer. 

Tawhid Al-Uluihiyyah 

Tawhid Ar-Rubibiyyah 

Allah called His Prophet 2% an ‘Abd 

Encouraging the Performance of the Acts of Worship 
during Times of Distress 

Why Praise was mentioned First 

The Meaning of Guidance mentioned in the Surah 


The Meaning of As-Sirdt Al-Mustagim, the Straight Path. 


The Faithful ask for and abide by Guidance 
The Summary of Al-Fatihah 
The Bounties are because of Allah, not the Deviations 


Contents 

Saying Amin 

Tafsir of Sarat Al-Baqarah (Chapter 2) 

The Virtues of Strat Al-Baqarah 

Virtues of Surat Al-Bagarah and Sarat Al ‘Imran 
Surat Al-Baqarah was revealed in Al-Madinah 
The Discussion of the Individual Letters 

The Letters at the Beginning of Surahs 

These Letters testify to the Miraculous Qur’an 
There is no Doubt in the Qur’an 

Guidance is granted to Those Who have Taqwa 
The Meaning of Al-Muttagin 

There are Two Types of Hiddyah (Guidance) 
Meaning of Taqwa 

The Meaning of Iman 

The Meaning of Al-Ghayb 

Meaning of Igamat As-Salah 

The Meaning of “Spending” in this Ayah 

The Meaning of Salah 

Attributes of the Believers 

Guidance and Success are awarded to the Believers 
Meaning of Khatama 

The Meaning of Ghishadwah 

The Hypocrites 

Meaning of Nifag 

The Beginning of Hypocrisy 

The Tafsir of Ayah 2:8 

The Meaning of ‘Disease’ in this Ayah 
Meaning of Mischief 

Types of Mischief that the Hypocrites commit 
The Hypocrites’ Cunning and Deceit 

Human and Jinn Devils 

The Meaning of ‘Mocking’ 

The Hypocrites suffering for their Plots 


Meaning of ‘Leaves them increasing in their deviation 


to wander blindly 

The Example of the Hypocrites 

Another Parable of the Hypocrites 

Types of Believers and Types of Disbelievers 
Types of Hearts 

Tawhid Al-Uluhiyyah 

A Hadith with the same Meaning 


10 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Signs of Allah’s Existence 

The Message of Messenger of Allah 2% is True 
The Challenge 

Examples of the Miracle of the Qur’an 


The Qur’an is the Greatest Miracle given to the Prophet 


Meaning of ‘Stones’ 

Jahannam (Hellfire) exists now 

Rewards of Righteous Believers 

The similarity between the Fruits of Paradise 

The Wives of the People of Paradise are Pure 

A Parable about the Life of This World 

The Meaning of ‘Loss’ 

Evidence of Allah’s Ability 

The Beginning of the Creation 

The Earth was created before Heaven 

Spreading the Earth out after the Heavens were created 
Adam and His Children inhabited the Earth, Generation 
after Generation 

The Obligation of appointing a Khalifah and some 
related Issues 

The Virtue of Adam over the Angels 

Adam's Virtue of Knowledge is demonstrated 

Honoring Adam when the Angels prostrated before Him 
Iblis was among Those ordered to prostrate before 
Adam, although He was not an Angel 

The Prostration was before Adam but the Obedience 
was to Allah 

Adam was honored again 

Hawwa’ was created before Adam entered Paradise 
Allah tests Adam 

Adam was very Tall 

Adam remained in Paradise for an Hour 

A Doubt and a Rebuttal 

Adam repents and supplicates to Allah 

Encouraging the Children of Israel to embrace Islam 
Israel is Prophet Ya‘qub (Jacob) 

Allah’s Blessings for the Children of Israel 

Reminding the Children of Israel of Allah’s Covenant 
with Them 

The Prohibition of hiding the Truth and distorting It 
with Falsehood 


155 
156 
157 
159 
163 
163 
164 
167 
168 
169 
170 
176 
178 
179 
180 
181 


182 


185 
187 
191 
193 


194 


194 
196 
196 
197 
199 
199 
200 
201 
204 
204 
205 


206 


209 


Contents 


The Condemnation of commanding Others to 
observe Righteousness while ignoring Righteousness 
The Support that comes with Patience and Prayer 
Reminding the Children of Israel that They were 
preferred above the Other Nations 

The Ummah of Muhammad 3 is Better than the 
Children of Israel 

Neither Intercession, Ransom, or Assistance will be 
accepted on behalf of the Disbelievers 

The Children of Israel were saved from Pharaoh and 
His Army Who drowned ~ 

Fasting the Day of ‘Ashura’ 

The Children of Israel worshipped the Calf 

The Children of Israel kill each other in Repentance 
The Best among the Children of Israel ask to see Allah; 
their subsequent Death and Resurrection 

The Shade, the Manna and the Quail 

The Virtue of Muhammad’s Companions over the 
Companions of all Other Prophets 

The Jews were Rebellious instead of Appreciative when 
They gained Victory 

Twelve Springs gush forth 

The Children of Israel preferred Foods inferior to 
Manna and Quails 

Covering the Jews in Humiliation and Misery 
Meaning of Kibr 

Faith and doing Righteous Deeds equals Salvation 
in all Times 

The Meaning of Mu’min, or Believer 

Why the Jews were called ‘Yahtd’ 

Why the Christians were called ‘Nasara’ 

The Sdbi’tin or Sabians 

Taking the Covenant from the Jews 

The Jews breach the Sanctity of the Sabbath 

The Monkeys and Swine that exist now are not 

the Descendants of Those that were transformed 
The Story of the murdered Israeli Man and the Cow 
The Stubbornness of the Jews regarding the Cow; Allah 
made the Matter difficult for Them 

Bringing the murdered Man back to Life 

The Harshness of the Jews 


11 


211 
215 


218 
219 
220 


224 
227 
228 
229 


231 
233 


236 


237 
242 


243 
245 
246 


247 
248 
249 
249 
250 
251 
253 


254 
256 


258 
260 
262 


12 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Solid Inanimate Objects possess a certain Degree 


of Awareness 264 
There was little Hope that the Jews Who lived during 

the Time of the Prophet 3% could have believed 267 
The Jews knew the Truth of the Prophet #%, but disbelieved 

in Him 269 
The Meaning of ‘Ummi’ 271 
The Explanation of Amani 272 
Woe unto Those Criminals among the Jews 273 
The Jews hope They will only remain in the Fire for 

a Few Days 275 


When Small Sins gather, They bring about Destruction 277 
The Covenant that Allah took from the Children of Israel 279 


The Terms of the Covenant and their Breach of It 283 
The Arrogance of the Jews who denied and killed 

Their Prophets 286 
Jibril is Rih Al-Qudus 288 
The Jews tried to kill the Prophet 3% 289 
The Jews were awaiting the Prophet’s coming, but 

They disbelieved in Him when He was sent 291 
Although The Jews denied the Truth, They claimed 

to be Believers! 296 
The Jews rebel after Allah took Their Covenant and 

raised the Mountain above Their Heads 298 
Calling the Jews to invoke Allah to destroy the Unjust 

Party 300 
Disbelievers wish They could live longer 303 
The Jews are the Enemies of Jibril 304 
Chocsing Some Angels to believe in over Others is 

Disbelief like choosing Some Prophets over Others 306 
Proofs of Muhammad’s Prophethood 311 
The Jews break Their Covenants 311 
The Jews abandoned the Book of Allah and practiced 

Magic 312 
Magic existed before Sulayman (Solomon) 313 
The Story of Harat and Marat, and the Explanation that 

They were Angels 5 314 
Learning Magic is Kufr 316 
Causing a Separation between the Spouses is One of 

the Effects of Magic 318 


Allah’s Appointed Term supercedes Everything 318 


Contents 


Manners in Speech 

The extreme Enmity that the Disbelievers and the 
People of the Book have against Muslims 

The Meaning of Naskh 

Naskh occurs even though the Jews deny it 

The Prohibition of Unnecessary Questions 

The Prohibition of following the Ways of the People 
of the Book 

The Encouragement to perform Good Deeds 

The Hopes of the People of the Book 

The Jews and Christians dispute among Themselves 
out of Disbelief and Stubbornness 

Of the Most Unjust are Those Who prevent People from 
the Masjids and strive for their Ruin 

The Good News that Islam shall prevail 

Facing the Qibiah (Direction of the Prayer) 

The Qibiah for the People of Al-Madinah is what is 
between the East and the West 

Refuting the Claim that Allah has begotten a Son 
Everything is within Allah’s Grasp 

The Meaning of Badi‘ 

The Description of the Prophet # in the Tawrah 
The Meaning of Correct Tilawah 

Ibrahim Al-Khalil was an Imdm for the People 

What were the Words that Ibrahim was tested with? 
The Unjust do not qualify for Allah’s Promise 

The Virtue of Allah’s House 

The Maqdm of Ibrahim 

The Command to Purify the House 

Makkah is a Sacred Area 


Ibrahim Invokes Allah to make Makkah an Area of Safety 


and Sustenance 


Building the Ka‘bah and asking Allah to accept This Deed 


The Story of rebuilding the House by Quraysh before 
the Messenger of Allah #% was sent as Prophet 

The Dispute regarding Who should place the Black 
Stone in Its Place 

Ibn Az-Zubayr rebuilds Al-Ka‘bah the way the 
Prophet #% Wished 

An Ethiopian will destroy the Ka‘bah just before 

the Last Hour 


14 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Al-Khalil’s Supplication 397 
The Meaning of Mandsik 399 
Ibrahimss Supplication that Allah sends the Prophet 3% 399 
The Meaning of Al-Kitab wal-Hikmah 401 
Only the Fools deviate from Ibrahim’s Religion 402 
Adhering to Tawhid until Death 405 
Ya‘qub’s Will and Testament to His Children upon His 

Death 407 
The Muslim believes in all that Allah revealed and 

All the Prophets 411 
Changing the Qiblah — Direction of the Prayer 418 
The Virtues of Muhammad’s Nation 422 
The Wisdom behind changing the Qiblah 425 


The First Abrogation in the Qur’an was about the Qiblah 429 
Is the Qiblah the Kabah itself or its General Direction™430 
The Jews had Knowledge that the (Muslim) Qiblah would 


later be changed 430 
The Stubbornness and Disbelief of the Jews 431 
The Jews know that the Prophet # is True, but they hide 
the Truth 433 
Every Nation has a Qiblah 434 
Why was changing the Qiblah mentioned Thrice? 436 
' The Wisdom behind abrogating the Previous Qiblah 437 
Muhammad’s Prophecy is a Great Bounty from Allah 439 
The Virtue of Patience and Prayer 442 
The Life enjoyed by Martyrs 443 
The Believer is Patient with the Affliction and thus 
gains a Reward 444 
The Virtue of asserting that We all belong to Allah, 
during Afflictions 447 
The Meaning of “it is not a sin” in the Ayah 448 
The Wisdom behind legislating Sat between As-Safa 
and Al-Marwah 450 
The Eternal Curse for Those Who hide Religious 
Commandments 452 
Cursing the Disbelievers is allowed 455 
The Proofs for Tawhid 457 
The Condition of the Polytheists in this Life and the 
Hereafter 460 


The Order to eat the Lawful Things, and the 
Prohibition of following the Footsteps of Shaytan 465 


Contents 


The Polytheist imitates Other Polytheists 

The Disbeliever is just like an Animal 

The Command to eat Pure Things and the 
Explanation of the Prohibited Things 

The Prohibited is Allowed in Cases of Emergency 
Criticizing the Jews for concealing what Allah revealed 
AL-Birr (Piety, Righteousness) 

The Command and the Wisdom behind the Law of 
Equality 

The Benefits and Wisdom of the Law of Equality 
Including Parents and Relatives in the Will was 
later abrogated 

The Will for the Relatives that do not qualify as 
Inheritors 

The Will should observe Justice 

The Virtue of Fairness in the Will 

The Order to Fast 

The various Stages of Fasting 

The Fidyah (Expiation) for breaking the Fast is for the 
Old and the Ailing 

The Virtue of Ramadan and the Revelation of the Qur’an 
in it. 

The Virtues of the Qur’an 

The Obligation of Fasting Ramadan 

Several Rulings concerning the Fast 

Ease and not Hardship 

Remembering Allah upon performing the Acts of Worship 
Allah hears the Servant’s Supplication 

Allah accepts the Invocation 

Three Persons whose Supplication will not be rejected 
Eating, Drinking and Sexual Intercourse are allowed 
during the Nights of Ramadan. 

Time for Suhdr 

Suhiar is recommended 

There is no Harm in beginning the Fast while 
Junub (a state of major ritual impurity) 

Fasting ends at Sunset 

Prohibition of Uninterrupted Fasting (Wisdal 

The Rulings of I‘tikaf 

Bribery is prohibited and is a Sin 

The Judge’s Ruling does not allow the Prohibited 


16 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


or prohibit the Lawful 

The Crescent Moons 

Righteousness Comes from Taqwa 

The Command to fight Those Who fight Muslims and 
killing Them wherever They are found 

The Prohibition of mutilating the Dead and stealing 
from the Captured Goods 

Shirk is worse than Killing 

Fighting in the Sacred Area is prohibited, except in 
Self-Defense 

The Order to Fight until there is no More Fitnah 
Fighting during the Sacred Months is Prohibited, 
except in Self-Defense 

The Command to spend in the Cause of Allah 

The Command to complete Hajj and ‘Umrah 

If One is prevented while in Route, He slaughters 
the Sacrifice, shaves his Head and ends Ihram 
Whoever shaved his Head during Ihram, will have to 
pay the Fidyah 

Tamattu‘ during Hajj 

Whoever performs Tamattu‘ should fast Ten Days 
if He does not have a Hady 

The Residents of Makkah do not perform Tamattu‘ 
When does Ihradm for Hajj start 

The Months of Hajj 


Prohibition of Rafath (Sexual Intercourse) During Hajj 


The Prohibition of Fustiq during Hajj 

The Prohibition of arguing during Hajj 

The Encouragement for Righteous Deeds and to 

bring Provisions for Hajj 

The Provisions of the Hereafter 

Commercial Transactions during Hajj 

Standing at ‘Arafat 

The Time to leave ‘Arafat and Al-Muzdalifah 
Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haraém 

The Order to stand on ‘Arafat and to depart from it 
Asking Allah for His Forgiveness 

The Order for Remembrance of Allah and seeking 
Good in this Life and the Hereafter upon completing 
the Rites of Hajj 

Remembering Allah during the Days of Tashriq 


522 
524 
524 


526 


527 
528 


529 
531 


534 
536 
539 


541 


544 
545 


547 
550 
551 
553 
554 
555 
557 


557 
558 
559 
560 
562 
563 
564 
565 


567 


Contents 


Days of Eating and Drinking 

The Appointed Days 

The Characteristics of the Hypocrites 

Rejecting Advice is Characteristic of the Hypocrites 

The Sincere Believer prefers pleasing Allah 

Entering Islam in its Entirety is obligated 

Do not delay embracing the Faith 

The Punishment for changing Allah’s Favor and mocking 
the Believers 

Disputing, after the Clear Signs have come, indicates 
Deviation 

Victory only comes after succeeding in the Trials 

Who deserves the Nafaqah (Spending or Charity) 
Jihad is made Obligatory 

The Nakhlah Military Manuvers, and the Ruling on 
Fighting During the Sacred Months 

The Gradual Prohibition of Khamr (Alchoholic Drink) 
Spending whatever One could spare of his Money on 
Charity 

Maintaining the Orphan’s Property 

The Prohibition of marrying Mushrik Men and Women 
Sexual Intercourse with Menstruating Women is 
prohibited 

Anal Sex is prohibited 

The Reason behind revealing Allah’s Statement: “Your 
Wives are a Tilth for You”. 

The Prohibition of swearing to abandon a Good Deed 
The Laghw (Unintentional) Vows 

The Ila’ and its Rulings 

The ‘Iddah (Waiting Period) of the Divorced Woman 
The Meaning of Al-Quru’ 

A Woman’s Statement about Menses and Purity is 

to be accepted 

The Husband has the Right to take back his Divorced 
Wife during the ‘Iddah (Waiting Period) 

The Rights the Spouses have over Each Other 

The Virtue Men have over Women 

Divorce is Thrice 

Taking back the Mahr (Dowry) 

Allowing Khul‘ and the Return of the Mahr in that Case 
The ‘Iddah (Waiting Period) for the Khul‘ 


17 


572 
573 
575 
579 
579 
581 
583 


585 


588 
591 
595 
596 


598 
604 


607 
609 
611 


615 
618 


618 
624 
626 
628 
630 
631 


632 


632 
633 
634 
635 
637 
637 
639 


18 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Transgressing the set limits of Allah is an Injustice 639 
Pronouncing Three Divorces at the same Time is 

Unlawful 640 
The Wife cannot be taken back after the Third Divorce 640 
The Curse on the Participants of Tahlil/Haldlah 642 
When does a Woman who was divorced Three 

Times become Eligible for Her First Husband 643 
Being Kind to the Divorced Wife 644 
The Wali (Guardian) of the Divorced Woman should 

not prevent Her from going back to Her Husband 647 
There is no Marriage without a Wali (for the Woman) 647 
The Reason behind revealing the Ayah (2:232) 648 
The Suckling Period is only Two Years 650 
Suckling beyond the Two Years 652 
Suckling for Monetary Compensation 652 
No Darar (Harm) or Dirdr (Revenge) 653 
Fitaém (weaning) occurs by Mutual Consent 654 
The Iddah (Waiting Period) of the Widow 656 
The Wisdom behind legislating the Iddah 657 
The Iddah of the Slave Mother whose Master dies 658 
Mourning is required during the Iddah of Death 658 
Mentioning Marriage indirectly during the Iddah 660 
Divorce before consummating the Marriage 664 
The Mut‘ah (Gift) at the time of Divorce 664 
The Wife gets half of Her Mahr if She is divorced 

before the Marriage is consummated 665 
The Middle Prayer 668 
The Proof that the ‘Asr Prayer is the Middle Prayer 669 
The Prohibition of speaking during the Prayer 671 
The Fear Prayer 672 
Prayer during the Times of Peace is performed normally 673 
Ayah (2:240) was abrogated 675 
The Necessity of the Mut‘ah (Gift) at the Time of 

Divorce 679 
The Story of the Dead People 680 
Abandoning Jihad does not alter Destiny 683 
The Good Loan and its Reward 684 


The Story of the Jews Who sought a King to be appointed 
over Them 686 


Important Guidelines about the 
Authenticity of the Reports and Quotations 
in the Tafsir of Ibn Kathir 


Reports from the Companions of the Messenger of Allah 3 


Reports that are attributed to the Companions of Allah’s 
Messenger #% are commonly used for additional explanation of 
the meanings of the Qur’an. As for those quotes that Ibn Kathir 
mentions in passing, these quotes may, or may not be 
authentically attributed to them. Wherever it is mentioned that 
one of them said something, and that statement contradicts 
other clearly authentic texts, then such statements can not be 
held as an evidence against what is known to be authentic. 
Additional information in this regard is found in the 
Introduction of Ibn Kathir. 


Incomplete Chains of Narration 


The following is a list of common incomplete chains of 
narrations that Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir often quotes. 

- ‘Ali bin Abi Talhah (Al-Wa4libi) reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said... 

- (‘Atiyah) Al-‘Awfi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said... 

- Ad-Dahhak from Ibn ‘Abbas. 

- As-Suddi reported from Abu Malik and Abu Sélih from Ibn 
‘Abbas, Ibn Mas‘ad and for] some men among the 
Companions. 

- Al-Hasan Al-Basri reporting from or about the Prophet 3. 

— Qatadah reporting from or about the Prophet 3%. 

All narrations coming from these chains are unauthentic 
according to the Sciences of Hadith. Their meanings, however, 
may be correct as understood by authentic texts, and for this 
reason they are commonly referenced. 


Reports from the Followers of the Companions and 
Those who follow Them 


The following is a list of those who did not see the Prophet 
#%, but they report from Companions of the Prophet 3%, while 


20 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


often they themselves are quoted for Tafsir. Reports that are 
attributed to them are used as additional support in 
understanding certain issues by Ibn Kathir. Such quotes may 
or may 'not be authentically attributed to them. Wherever it is 
mentioned that one of them said something, and that 
statement contradicts other clearly authentic texts, then such 
statements can not be held as evidence against the authentic 
evidence. 

Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Said bin Jubayr, Sa‘id bin Al-Musayyib, 
‘Ata’ (bin Abi Rabiih), ‘Ata’ Al-Khuradsani, Muqatil bin Hayyan, 
Ar-Rabr’ bin Anas, Ash-Sha’‘bi, Qatadah, Mujahid, Tkrimah, 
Ad-Dahhak, ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam (Ibn Zayd), 
Ibn Jurayj. 


Other Scholars after the Companions 


The following are some scholars that Ibn Kathir often quotes 
from. Since these scholars are not well-known to the average 
English reader, one should beware that their own statements 
about the Prophet 3%, his Companions, or circumstances 
surrounding the Qur’an’s revelation, are not to be considered 
as important as authentically narrated texts. 

Waki’, Sufyan Ath-Thawri, Muhammad bin Ishaq, Ibn 
‘Atiyah, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Jarir (At-Tabari). 


The Biography of the Author, Ibn Kathir 


By the Honored Shaykh ‘Abdul-Qadir Al-Arna’at, may Allah 
protect him. 

He is the respected Imam, Abu Al-Fida’, Imad Ad-Din Ismail 
bin Umar bin Kathir Al-Qurashi Al-Busrawi - Busraian in 
origin; Dimashdi in training, learning and residence. 

Ibn Kathir was born in the city of Busra in 701 H. His father 
was the Friday speaker of the village, but he died while Ibn 
Kathir was only four years old. Ibn Kathir’s brother, Shaykh 
Abdul-Wahhab, reared him and taught him until he moved to 
Damascus in 706 H., when he was five years old. 


Ibn Kathir’s Teachers 


Ibn Kathir studied Figh - Islamic jurisprudence - with 
Burhan Ad-Din, Ibrahim bin ‘Abdur-Rahman Al-Fizari, known 
as Ibn Al-Firkah (who died in 729 H). Ibn Kathir heard 
Hadiths from ‘tsa bin Al-Mutim, Ahmad bin Abi Talib, (Ibn 
Ash-Shahnah) (who died in 730 H), Ibn Al-Hajjar, (who died in 
730 H), and the Hadith narrator of Ash-Sham (modern day 
Syria and surrounding areas); Baha Ad-Din Al-Qasim bin 
Muzaffar bin ‘Asakir (who died in 723 H), and Ibn Ash-Shirazi, 
Ishaq bin Yahya Al-Ammuddi, also known as ‘Afif Ad-Din, the 
Zahiriyyah Shaykh who died in 725 H, and Muhammad bin 
Zarrad. He remained with Jamal Ad-Din, Yasuf bin Az-Zaki Al- 
Mizzi who died in 724 H, he benefited from his knowledge and 
also married his daughter. He also read with Shaykh Al-Islam, 
Taqi Ad-Din Ahmad bin ‘Abdul-Halim bin ‘Abdus-Salam bin 
Taymiyyah who died in 728 H. He also read with the Imam 
Hafiz and historian Shams Ad-Din, Muhammad bin Ahmad 
bin Uthman bin Qaymaz Adh-Dhahabi, who died in 748 H. 
Also, Abu Musa Al-Qarafai, Abu Al-Fath Ad-Dabbtsi and ‘Ali 
bin ‘Umar As-Suwani and others who gave him permission to 
transmit the knowledge he learned with them in Egypt. 

In his book, Al-Muam Al-Mukhtas, Al-Hafiz Adh-Dhahabi 
wrote that Ibn Kathir was, “The Imam, scholar of 
jurisprudence, skillful scholar of Hadith, renowned Faqih and 
scholar of Tafsir who wrote several beneficial books.” 


22 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Further, in Ad-Durar Al-Kdminah, Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar Al- 
Asqalani said, “Ibn Kathir worked on the subject of the Hadith 
in the areas of texts and chains of narrators. He had a good 
memory, his books became popular during his lifetime, and 
people benefited from them after his death.” 

Also, the renowned historian Abu Al-Mahasin, Jamal Ad-Din 
Yasuf bin Sayf Ad-Din (Ibn Taghri Bardi), said in his book, Al- 
Manhal As-Sdafi, “He is the Shaykh, the Imam, the great 
scholar ‘Imad Ad-Din Abu Al-Fida’. He learned extensively and 
was very active in collecting knowledge and writing. He was 
excellent in the areas of Figh, Tafsir and Hadith. He collected 
knowledge, authored (books), taught, narrated Hadiths and 
wrote. He had immense knowledge in the fields of Hadith, 
Tafsir, Fiqh, the Arabic language, and so forth. He gave 
Fatwas (religious verdicts) and taught until he died, may Allah 
grant him mercy. He was known for his precision and vast 
knowledge, and as a scholar of history, Hadith and Tafsir.” 


Ibn Kathir’s Students 


Ibn Hajji was one of Ibn Kathir’s students, and he described 
Ibn Kathir: “He had the best memory of the Hadith texts. He 
also had the most knowledge concerning the narrators and 
authenticity, his contemporaries and teachers admitted to 
these qualities. Every time | met him I gained some benefit 
from him.” 

Also, Ibn Al-Imad Al-Hanbali said in his book, Shadhardt 
Adh-Dhahab, “He is the renowned Hafiz ‘Imad Ad-Din, whose 
memory was excellent, whose forgetfulness was miniscule, 
whose understanding was adequate, and who had good 
knowledge in the Arabic language.” Also, Ibn Habib said about 
Ibn Kathir, “He heard knowledge and collected it and wrote 
various books. He brought comfort to the ears with his Fatwds 
and narrated Hadiths and brought benefit to other people. The 
papers that contained his Fatwds were transmitted to the 
various (Islamic) provinces. Further, he was known for his 
precision and encompassing knowledge.” 


Ibn Kathir’s Books 
1 - One of the greatest books that Ibn Kathir wrote was his 


The Biography of the Author, Ibn Kathir 23 


Tafsir of the Noble Qur’an, which is one of the best Tafsirs 
that rely on narrations [of Hadiths, the Tafsir of the 
Companions, etc.]. The Tafsir by Ibn Kathir was printed many 
times and several scholars have summarized it. 

2- The History Collection known as AI-Biddyah, which was 
printed in 14 volumes under the name _ Al-Biddyah wan- 
Nihdyah, and contained the stories of the Prophets and 
previous nations, the Prophet’s Sirah (life story) and Islamic 
history until his time. He also added a book Al-Fitan, about 
the Signs of the Last Hour. 

3- At-Takmil ft Ma‘rifat Ath-Thigat wa Ad-Du‘afa wal Majahil 
which Ibn Kathir collected from the books of his two Shaykhs 
Al-Mizzi and Adh-Dhahabi; Al-Kamal and Mizdn Al-I'‘tidal. He 
added several benefits regarding the subject of AlJarh and At- 
T‘adil. 

4- Al-Hadi was-Sunan fi Ahadith Al-Masadnid was-Sunan 
which is also known by, Jami‘ Al-Masanid. In this book, Ibn 
Kathir collected the narrations of Imams Ahmad bin Hanbal, 
Al-Bazzar, Abu Ya‘la Al-Mawsili, Ibn Abi Shaybah and from the 
six collections of Hadith: the Two Sahihs [Al-Bukhari and 
Muslim] and the Four Sunan [Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, An- 
Nasai and Ibn Majah]. Ibn Kathir divided this book according 
to areas of Figh. 

5-Tabagqat Ash-Shafiyah w which also contains the virtues of 
Imam Ash-Shafi. 

6- Ibn Kathir wrote references for the Hadiths of Adillat At- 
Tanbih, from the Shdfi school of Figh. 

7- Ibn Kathir began an explanation of Sahih Al-Bukhari, but 
he did not finish it. 

8- He started writing a large volume on the Ahkdm (Laws), 
but finished only up to the Hajj rituals. 

9- He summarized Al-Bayhaqi’s Al-Madkhal. Many of these 
books were not printed. 

10- He summarized ‘Ulim Al-Hadith, by Abu ‘Amr bin As- 
Salah and called it Mukhtasar ‘Ulim Al-Hadith. Shaykh Ahmad 
Shakir, the Egyptian Muhaddith, printed this book along with 
his commentary on it and called it Al-Ba‘th Al-Hathith fi Sharh 
Mukhtasar ‘Ulum Al-Hadith. 

11- As-Sirah An-Nabawiyyah, which is contained in his book 
Al-Bidayah, and both of these books are in print. 


24 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


12- A research on Jihad called AlJjtihad fi Talabi Al-Jihdd, 
which was printed several times. 


Ibn Kathir’s Death 
Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalani said, “Ibn Kathir lost his sight 
just before his life ended. He died in Damascus in 774 H.” 
May Allah grant mercy upon Ibn Kathir and make him 
among the residents of His Paradise. 


Introduction 25 
wi —_ SI ai —} 


Ibn Kathir’s Introduction 


All praise is due to Allah, Who started His Book by saying, 
1 SA ye il oat rad So Usilp 
€All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of all that exists. The 


Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. The Owner of the Day of 
Recompense} (Al-Fatihah 1:2-4) 
and Who began His creation with the Hamd (His praise and 
appreciation), by saying, 


ew 


roe OS aa OE TAG oi iss BMG eget GE ull & Lip 

Sesh ies 
<All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who created the heavens 
and the earth, and originated the darkness and the light; yet 


those who disbelieve hold others equal to their Lord» (Al-An‘am 
6:1), 


and ended it with the Hamd, by saying, after mentioning the 
destination of the people of Paradise and the people of the Fire, 
b5) Ae et oat no oe RS ll us bo ast Kati 25> 
ibs os Sad 
¢And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne (of 
Allah), glorifying their Lord with praise. And judgement will 
be made between them (creatures) with the truth. And it will be 


said, “All praise and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that 
exists.""> (39:75). 


And similarly, 
€ 3353 sy KONG SG AN gc 5A BD 
¢He is Allah, there is no ilah except for Him, His is the praise 


in the beginning and in the end, His is the judgement and to 
Him shall you (all) return .> (28:70) 


Verily, all thanks are due to Allah in the beginning and in 


26 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


the end, for what He has created and what He shall create. 
Allah is the One praised for all things, just as the praying 
person says, “O Allah, Yours is the praise, praise that fills the 
heavens, the earth and whatever You will after that.”!?! 
All the thanks are due to Allah Who sent His Messengers, 
whom He described as, 
Bearers of good news, and warners, so that mankind would 
have no plea against Allah after the (coming of) Messengers.> 
(An-Nis@’ 4:165) 
and ended them with the unlettered, Arabian, Makkan Prophet 
who guides to the clear straight path. Allah sent the Prophet 
Muhammad 3% to all of His creation - the Jinns and mankind - 
from the time that his prophethood began until the 
commencement of the Last Hour. Allah said, 
YANG osc 10 i ol oe ead At 25 5) Ol A Sp 
wiles Sh 28 elt AT 33 ess Ab LG LR A 
4s peal 1256 
<Say (O Muhammad #3): “O mankind! Verily, I am the 
Messenger sent to you all by Allah, the One to Whom the 
dominion of the heavens and the earth belongs. There is no god 
(worthy of worship) but He. It is He Who gives life and causes 
death. So believe in Allah and His Messenger, the unlettered 
Prophet, who believes in Allah and His Words, and follow him 
so that you may be guided.’’> (ALA ‘raf 7:158) and, 


<That by it, I may warn you and whoever it reaches> (Al- 
An‘am 6:19). 


Therefore, whether one is an Arab or non-Arab, black or red, 
human or Jinn, whoever this Qur’én is conveyed to, it is a 
warning for them all. This is why Allah said, 


Pad 


qide% Sb SAM & a BE 5 
(1) Al-Bukhari, Muslim and others have recorded Hadiths mentioning 
this supplication . 


Introduction 27 


<But whoever rejects it among the groups (of other peoples), the 
Fire will be their promised meeting place> (Hid 11:17). 


Therefore, whoever disbelieves in the Qur’én among those 
whom we mentioned, then, according to Allah, the Fire will be 
their destination. Allah said, 

70 ¥is GAEL LA, OR 4 st 
4Then leave Me alone with those who deny this narration (the 
Qur’an). We shall gradually punish them from where they 
perceive not.> (Nin 68:44). 


Also, the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 
052415 291 oh 


«] was sent to the white and red.» Mujahid commented, “Meaning, 
mankind and the Jinns.”"] Hence, Muhammad #& is the 
Messenger to all creation, mankind and Jinn, conveying what 
Allah revealed to him in the Glorious Book that, 
46 2S BOS sb & ad & desl ot yp 
<Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it, (it is) 
sent down by the Wise, Worthy of all praise.> (Fussilat 41:42) 


Therefore, the scholars are required to elaborate upon the 
meanings of Allaéh’s Speech and to convey these meanings, 
providing they seek them from their proper resources. The 
scholars are required to learn and convey these meanings, just 
as Allah said, 

477 Reece Je pion to , oo oo: ect tbh on fe oe Se 4°E oD 
ay as AES TS ty para] LESH ish Si She tat 35h 45> 
32 Ser ue wee a, 2 % (OS Ste i 
CBE RSG ES IS EE og EG past 


<(And remember) when Allah took a covenant from those who 
were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) to make it 
known and clear to mankind, and not to hide it, but they threw 
it away behind their backs, and purchased with it some 
miserable gain! And indeed worst is that which they bought.> 
(Al ‘Imran 3:187) and, 


Ce ote eh or Ye 8 wehbe Se oe 8 Bee » Be go 
% rH 3 WB I OG NS CS Hh Ha, ok Gat Gp 


¥ 


Ul Anmad 5:145. 


28 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
€A Bie 5 Spe MG acca Fo gh 28s ST 
<Verily, those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's 
covenant and their oaths, they shall have no portion in the 
Hereafter (Paradise). Neither will Allah speak to them nor look 


at them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them, 
and they shall have a painful torment} (Al Imran 3:77). 


Allah criticized the People of the Scriptures - Jews and 
Christians - who came before us, for ignoring Allah’s Book 
that was revealed to them, and for acquiring and indulging in 
the affairs of this life, all the while being distracted from what 
they were commanded, that is, adhering to Allah’s Book. 

We Muslims are thus required to refrain from doing what 
Allah criticized the People of the Scriptures for, and to heed 
what He commanded us; learning and comprehending the 
Book of Allah, revealed to us, and to convey all that is in it. 
Allah said, 

NE OS GA GG A Zea OR GE A Te os le 
Mi NG RSLS oe 4G BE cc A 1 SG SS CST US 
€Has not the time come for the hearts of those who believe (in 
the Oneness of Allah — Islamic Monotheism) to be affected by 
Allah's Reminder (this Qur‘dn), and that which has been 
revealed of the truth, lest they become as those who recetved the 
Scripture before, and the term was prolonged for them and so 
their hearts were hardened? And many of them were Fasiqun 
(the rebellious, the disobedient to Allah) Know that Allah gives 
life to the earth after its death! Indeed We have made clear the 
Ayat to you, if you but understand} (57:16-17). 

Hence, Allah’s mentioning this Ayah (57:17) after the Ayah 
that preceded it, alerts us to the fact that just as He brings 
life to the earth after it has died, He also softens the hearts 
with faith and guidance after they become hard because of 
committing sins and errors. We ask Allah to grant us this 
good end, He is Most Kind, Most Generous. 


Introduction 29 


The Sources for Tafsir 


If someone asks about the best methods of Tafsir, we reply 
that the best method is to explain the Qur’én with the Qur’an 
itself. What is mentioned in general terms in one place in the 
Qur’an, is usually explained in another place. When one does 
not find this easily, he should look to the Sunnah because its 
purpose is to explain the Qur’aén and elaborate upon its 
meanings. Allah said, 


Sid SG SOG uO Ka Ah cosh ah WS Hp 
qed 


-" 


<Surely, We have sent down to you (O Muhammad 3%) the 
Book (this Qur'an) in truth that you might judge between men 
by that which Allah has shown you, so be not a pleader for the 
treacherous. (4:105), 


Rope od LAG 65 da AE oll 2 cs VY CES oe EA > 
¢And We have not sent down the Book (the Qur‘an) to you (O 
Muhammad #4), except that you may explain clearly unto them 
those things in which they differ, and (as) a guidance and a 
mercy for a folk who believe.> (16:64) and, 


CaS is og Gv oh Gh Le Sy hp 
<And We have also sent down unto you (O Muhammad #%) the 
Dhikr [reminder and the advice (i.e. the Qur'an)], that you 
may explain clearly to men what is sent down to them, and that 
they may give thought.> (16:44). 
This is why the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 
I was given the Qur'an and its equal with ito, in reference to 
the Sunnah." 
The Sunnah was a revelation from Allah just as the Qur'an, 
although it is not recited as the Qur’an is recited. 
So one seeks the Tafsir of the Qur’An with the Qur'an itself 
and with the Sunnah. If one cannot find the Tafsir in the 


1") Ahmad 4:131 


30 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Qur’én or Sunnah, he should refer to the statements of the 
Companions, who were the most knowledgeable of Tafsir, for 
they witnessed the situations and incidents that we did not 
witness. They also had the deepest comprehension, the most 
correct knowledge, and the most righteous works. Especially 
the scholars and leaders among them, such as the Four 
Rightly Guided Khalifahs and righteous Imams, and ‘Abdullah 
bin Mas‘ad, may Allah be pleased with them all. Imam Abu 
Jafar bin Jarir At-Tabari narrated that ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘id 
said, “By He other than Whom there is no God, no Ayah in the 
Book of Allah was revealed but I have knowledge about whom 
and where it was revealed. Verily, if 1 know of a person who has 
more knowledge than me in the Book of Allah that the animals 
can reach (by travelling on them), I will travel to meet him.” 

Also, among the scholars of the Companions is the great 
scholar, the sea of knowledge, ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas, the 
cousin of the Messenger of Allah #% and the explainer of the 
Qur'an, as a result of the blessing of the supplication of the 
Messenger of Allah #%. The Prophet # invoked Allah for the 
benefit of Ibn ‘Abbas, 


pest ales UN 3 GB aa 


tO Allah! Teach him Fiqh in the religion and 
interpretation .0!") 


Further, Ibn Jarir At-Tabari reported that ‘Abdullah bin 
Mas‘td said, “Yes, Ibn ‘Abbas is the interpreter of the Qur’an.” 
This Hadith has an authentic chain of narrators.”! Ibn Mas‘dd 
died in the thirty-second year of Hijrah and ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas 
lived for thirty-six years after that. Hence, what do you think 
about the knowledge that Ibn ‘Abbas collected after Ibn Mas‘Qd? 
Al-A‘mash said that Abu Wa’il said, “Ali once appointed 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas to lead the Hajj season. Ibn ‘Abbas gave a 
speech to the people in which he read and explained Surat Al- 
Bagarah (according to another narration, Sdrat An-Nir) in such 
a way, that if the Romans, Turks and the Daylam heard him, 
they would have embraced Islam.”*! 


(1) Fath Al-Bari 1:205. 
2] At-Tabari 1:90. 
[3] At-Tabari 1:81. 


Introduction 31 


This is why the majority of the knowledge Isma‘ll bin ‘Abdur- 
Rahm4n As-Suddi Al-Kabir collected in his Tafsir is from these 
two men, Ibn Mas‘id and Ibn ‘Abbas. Yet, he sometimes 
mentions what they narrated of the Israelite accounts that the 
Messenger of Allah 3% has allowed when he said, 


asada Sle SiS 35 SC YS DHL ot SE NES ATS fe Lal 
OO 3. caaks Ia 


«Convey on my behalf, even if it is one Ayah (sentence), and 
narrate from the Children of Israel, as there is no sin in this. 
And whoever intentionally lies on me, let him assume his 
assured seat in the Fire.» 


This Hadith from ‘Abdullah bin Amr was collected by Al- 
Bukhari (Fath Al-Bari 6:572). This is why when ‘Abdullah bin 
‘Amr had possession of two books from the People of the 
Scripture on the Day (battle) of the Yarmuk, he used to 
narrate what was in them, because of what he understood of 
the Hadith that allowed this practice. 


Israelite Accounts and Tales 


Yet, the Israelite accounts and stories should only be used 
as supporting evidence, not as evidence themselves. There are 
three types of these accounts and tales; a kind that we are 
sure is authentic because we have in our religion something 
that testifies to its truth. The second type is what we know to 
be false based on what we have. The third is of neither type. 
Hence, we neither affirm nor deny this type, and we are 
allowed to narrate it, because of the Hadith that we 
mentioned. The majority of these are of no religious benefit. 
For instance, an Israelite tale mentions the names and 
number of the people of the Cave (Al-Kahf) and the color of 
their dog. They also include the type of tree Moses’ staff was 
made of, the kind of the birds Ibrahim brought back to life by 
Allah’s leave, the part of the cow the dead Israelite was struck 
with to resurrect him, and the kind of tree that Allah spoke to 
Moses through. Such examples of things that Allah kept 
unexplained in the Qur’én do not carry any daily or religious 
significance for responsible adults. 


32 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
The Tafsir of the Tabi‘in 


When unable to find the Tafsir in the Qur’an, the Sunnah or 
with the Companions, the scholars then look to the Tafsir of 
the Tabiin, (second generation of Islam) such as Mujahid bin 
Jabr, who was a wonder himself in Tafsir. Muhammad bin 
Ishaq narrated that. Abban bin Salih said that Mujahid said, “I 
reviewed the Mushaf with Ibn ‘Abbas thrice from beginning to 
end asking him about each and every Ayah in it.” Also, Ibn 
Jarir narrated that Ibn Abi Mulaykah said, “I saw Mujahid 
asking Ibn ‘Abbas about the Tafsir of the Qur’én while he was 
holding his tablets (papers). Ibn ‘Abbas would say to him, 
‘Write,’ until Mujahid asked him about the entire Tafsir.” This 
is why Sufyan Ath-Thawri said, “If the Tafsir reaches you from 
Mujahid, then it is sufficient for you.”") 


The scholars of Tafsir also include Said bin Jubayr, 
‘Ikrimah-the freed servant of Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Ata’ bin Abi Rabah, 
Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Masraq bin Al-Ajda‘, Sa‘id bin Al- 
Musayyib, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Qataédah, Ad- 
Dahhak bin Muzahim and other scholars among the Tabi‘in 
and the following generations. The statements of these Imams 
should be mentioned and referred to for Tafsir. We should 
mention here that these scholars use a variety of meanings for 
some words, leading those who do not have enough knowledge 
to think that they conflict, and thus, they consider them 
opposing statements. This is not correct, for some of these 
scholars would use variations of the same expressions and 
some of them would use the precise terms. These meanings 
are all the same in the majority of instances, and those who 
have sound comprehension see this, and Allah is the One Who 
guides and directs to success. 


Tafsir by mere Opinion 


It is prohibited to indulge in Tafsir by mere opinion. 
‘Muhammad bin Jarir reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the 
Prophet 3% said, 


eG Sp oaais (adi lag YG, 5 als, oid 3 Jb iy 


(1) For this, and the previous quotes, see At-Tabari 1 :90-91. 


asd, eee 


Introduction 33 


«Whoever explains the Qur'an with his opinion or with what he 
has no knowledge of, then let him assume his seat in the Fire. 


At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa’i and Abu Dawud also recorded this 
Hadith. At-Tirmidhi said, "Hasan". 


Explaining what One has Knowledge of, Silence 
otherwise 


The Salaf used to refrain from explaining what they had no 
knowledge of. For instance, Ibn Jarir (At-Tabari) reported that 
Abu Ma‘mar said that Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said, “Which land 
will carry me and which heaven will shade me if I said about 
Allah’s Book that which I have no knowledge of?”"! Ibn Jarir 
also reported that Anas narrated that ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab — 
read the Ayah, 


4th, <5 

€And fruits and Abba (herbage, etc.)> 
while standing on the Minbar. He then said, “We know the fruit, 
so what is the Abbd?” He then said, “O ‘Umar! This is 
exaggeration.”!7] This statement means that ‘Umar briefly 


wanted to know the exact nature of the Abba, for it was evident - 
to him - that it is a plant that grows on earth, just as Allah said, 


CES & HEE ED 
¢And We cause therein the grain to grow. And grapes and 
clover plants (i.e. green fodder for the cattle)» (80:27-28). 


Ibn Jarir also recorded that Ibn Abi Mulaykah said that Ibn 
‘Abbas was asked about an Ayah, “That if any of you is asked 
about, he will indulge in its Tafsir.” without hesitation Ibn 
‘Abbas refused to say anything about it (meaning with his 
opinion). This narration has an authentic chain of narrators. 
He also narrated that Ibn Abi Mulaykah said, “A man asked 
Ibn ‘Abbas about, 


45 St wks oF 43> 
<One Day, the space whereof is a thousand years.> 


Ul At-Tabari 1:78. 
[2] at-Tabari 24 :229. 


34 Tafsir_lbn_ Kathir 


Ibn ‘Abbas asked him, ‘What is, 
i gh HG SP 
€Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years>?’ 


The man said, 1 only asked you to tell me.’ Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
They are two Days that Allah has mentioned in His Book and 
He has better knowledge of them.’ He disliked commenting on 
the Book of Allah when he had no knowledge about it.” 

Al-Layth narrated that Yahya bin Said said that Satid bin 
Al-Musayyib used to talk about what he knows of the Qur’an 
(At-Tabari 1:86). Also, Ayyab, Ibn ‘Awn and Hisham Ad- 
Dastuwa7 narrated that Muhammad bin Sirin said, “I asked 
‘Ubaydah (meaning, As-Salmani ) about an Ayah of the Qur’an 
and he said, “Those who had knowledge about the 
circumstances surrounding revelation of the Qur’aén have 
perished. So fear Allah and seek the right way.” Ash-Shabi 
narrated that Masrtq said, “Avoid Tafsir, because it is 
narration related to Allah.”!"! 

These authentic narrations from the Companions and the 
Imams of the Salaf (righteous ancestors) testify to their 
hesitation to indulge in the Tafsir of what they have no 
knowledge of. As for those who speak about what they have 
linguistic and religious knowledge of, then there is no sin in 
this case. Hence, the scholars and the Imams, including the 
ones we mentioned, issued statements of Tafsir and spoke 
about what they had knowledge of, but avoided what they had 
no knowledge of. Refraining from indulging in what one has no 
knowledge of is required of everyone, just as everyone is 
required to convey the knowledge that they have when they 
are asked. Allah said, 


525s 5 of > 
€To make it known and clear to mankind, and not to hide it> 
(3:187). 


Also, a Hadith narrated through several chains of narrators 
says, 


i i 1 ee 
UU Spe pln, SALA 65s wa dl casts ole Ye Jee Sa 
(1) At-Tabari 1:86, for these quotes. 


Introduction 35 


‘Whoever is asked about knowledge that he knows but hid it, 
will be tied with a muzzle made of fire on the Day of 
Resurrection .»!1 


The Makkan and Madinan Sirahs 


Hammam narrated that Qatadah said, “Surahs: Al Baqarah 
(2), Al ‘Imran (3), An-Nisad’ (4), Al-Md’idah (5), Bard’ah (9), Ar- 
Ra‘d (13), An-Nahl (16), Al-Hajj (22), An-Nur (24), ALAhzab 
(33), Muhammad (47), Al-Fath (48), Al-Hujurat (49), Ar-Rahmdan 
(55), Al-Hadid (57), Al-Mujddilah (58), Al-Hashr (59), Al- 
Mumtahanah (60), As-Saff (61), AlJumu‘ah (62), Al-Mundfiqun 
(63), At-Taghabun (64), At-Taldq (65), 


dif 4 ial Hee 
¢O Prophet! Why do you forbid (for yourself)» to Ayah 


number ten, and also 
18 > 
4When is shaken} (99:1), and, 


4a 7-5 eS yp 
«When there comes the Help of Alléh (to you, O Muhammad 2 
against your enemies)> (110:1) in the Qur’an were revealed in Al- 
Madinah. The rest were revealed in Makkah.” 


The Number of the Qur’anic Aydt 


As for the count of Aydt of the Glorious Qur’an, these are at 
least six thousand. There is a difference of opinion over this 
count; some said the number is six thousand, while some 
added two hundred and four Aydt and some added fourteen. 
Also, some added two hundred and nineteen, while some 
others added two hundred and twenty-five or twenty-six. 
Furthermore, others added two hundred and thirty-si.:., as Abu 
‘Amr Ad-Dani said in his book, Al-Baydn. 


The Number of Words and the Letters of the Qur’an 


As for the number of the words and the letters of the 
Glorious Qur’an, Al-Fadi bin Shadhan said that ‘Ata’ bin Yasar 


[M Ahmad, At-Tirmidhi, and others. 


36 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


_said they are, “Seventy-seven thousand, four hundred and 
thirty-nine words.” 

As for the number of letters of the Qur’an, ‘Abdullah bin 
Kathir said that Mujahid said, “This is our count of the letters 
in the Qur’an: three hundred twenty-one thousand one 
hundred and eighty letters.” Further, Al-Fadl said that ‘Ata’ 
bin Yasar said that the Qur’aén has, “Three hundred twenty- 
three thousand and fifteen letters.” In addition, Salam Abu 
Muhammad Al-Hamani said, “Al-Hajjaj gathered the readers 
(of the Qur’an), those who memorized it, and the scribes, and 
he asked them, Tell me about the entire Qur’én, how many 
letters does it consist of?’ They said, ‘We counted three 
hundred forty thousand seven hundred and forty letters.” 


Dividing the Qur’an into Parts 


Al-Hajjaj then said, “Tell me where the middle is.” They 
found that the middle is at Allah’s statement, 


¢ulis 


€And let him be careful» in Strat Al-Kahf (18:19) while the 
third is at the hundredth Ayah in Surat Bard’ah (9). The 
second third ends at the hundredth or the hundred and first 
Ayah of Surat Ash-Shu‘ard (26), and the last third ends at the 
end of the Qur’4n. The seventh ends at the end of Allah’s 
statement, 


45S oh 5 og Gl KE ESD 
Of them were (some) who believed in him (Muhammad 3), 
and of them were (some) who averted their faces» (4:55). 
The second seventh ends at last letter of His statement in 
Surat ALA‘raf (7:147), 
4eh5> 


> 


Then will be lost» The third seventh ends at Allah’s statement 
in Sarat Ar-Ra‘d (13: 35), 

<I> 
Its provision.» The fourth at the end of His statement in Surat 
Al-Hajj (22:34), 


 aavenee's 


Introduction 37 


«We have appointed religious ceremonies.» The fifth seventh ends 
at Allah’s statement in Sdrat Al-Ahzab (33:36), 


KEES ph 3 


4It is not for a believer, man or woman}. The sixth seventh ends 
at Allah’s statement in Surat Al-Fath (48:6) 


4531 C8 A GALLI 
«Who think evil thoughts about Allah .> 


The last seventh ends at the end of the Qur’an. 

Salam bin Muhammad then said, “We learned these facts in 
four months.” Some people said that Al-Hajjaj used to read one 
fourth of the Qur’an each night. We should mention that the 
first fourth ends at the end of Surat Al-An‘am (6), the second at, 


4s) 


¢And let him be carefulp Strat Al-Kahf (18:19), the third at the 
end of AzZumar (39) and the last fourth at the end of the 
Qur’an. Ash-Shaykh Abu ‘Amr Ad-D&ani said in his book, Al- 
Bayan, that there is a difference of opinion over all of these 
statements. Allah knows best. 


The Juzu’ or Chapter of the Qur’an 


As for the chapters of the Qur’an, there are thirty well- 
known Juzu’, which are used in the various schools and so 
forth. We mentioned the Hadith that the Companions used to 
divide the Qur’én by Juzu’s - not Strahs - This Hadith is 
recorded in the Musnad of Imam Ahmad, Sunan of Abu 
Dawud and by Ibn Majah, that Aws bin Hudhayfah said that 
he asked the Companions of the Messenger of Allah # during 
his lifetime about how they used to divide the Qur’an. They 
said, “A third, a fifth, a seventh, a ninth, one-eleventh, one- 
thirteenth and the Mufassal until the end.”!!! 


The Meaning of Sdrah 


There is a difference of opinion about the meaning of the 
word ‘Surah’ - chapter - and what it is derived from. It was 


oe Ahmad, Abu Dawud, and Ibn Majah. 


38 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


said that ‘Sarah’ means elevation and height. 

An-Nabighah - a renowned poet from the pre-Islamic era - 
said (when he was praising a king), 

‘Do you realize that Allah has given you such a Sawrah, that 
every other king remains far below it?’ 

Furthermore, Surah implies that the reader is moving from 
one stage to another. It was also said that Surah means 
height, just like walls that surround cities. It was said that 
Surah was called as such because it is a part of the Qur’an, 
as compared to the word Asdr, which is in reference to 
whatever remains in the pot. Therefore, in this case, the origin 
of the word was altered so that the word now reads Surah. It 
was also said that Surah was called such because it is 
complete and perfect, as the Arabs used to call the perfect 
camel a Surah. I say that the word Sirah means collecting or 
surrounding parts - or the Aydt in this case, just as the wall 
that surrounds the city, surrounds its homes and buildings. 
The plural for the word Sirah is Siwar, Stiwardt and Surat. 


The Meaning of Ayah 


The Ayah is the sign - or pause - that separates the speech 
before and after, meaning that the Ayah is separate from its 
preceding and following sentences. Allah said, 


qigcel it i> 
<The sign of His kingdom} (2:248). 
It was also said that it was called ‘Ayah’, meaning, ‘a 


wonder’, because mankind is unable to produce something like 
it. The plurals for Ayah are Ayy, Aydt and Aydy. 


The Meaning of Kalimah 


As for the word Kalimah, it means ‘one word’, which might 
consist of two letters such as Ma and La. The Kalimah might 
also contain more than ten letters such as, 


Serica 
<Layastakhlifannahum >(24:55), 
ta zehl 


<Anulzimukumuha> (11:28) and, 


Introduction 39 


qScchp 


¢Fa-Asqaynakumuh>. (15:22) Also, a Kalimah might constitute 
an entire Ayah, such as 


€ pall> 
<Wal-Fajr> (89:1) 
pid 
4Wad-Duha> (93:1) and, 
€ padiyp 
qWal-‘Asr> (103:1). 

Further, the scholars of Kufah said that each of ‘Alif Lam 
Mim, Ta Ha, Yasin, Ha Mim is a Kalimah. In addition, Abu 
‘Amr Ad-D4ni said, “I know of only one Ayah that is one word, 
that is, Allah’s statement, 

43802 

«Mudhammatan> in Stirat Ar-Rahman (55:64).” 


Does the Qur’an contain non-Arabic Words? 


Al-Qurtubi said, “There is a consensus that the Qur’An does 
not contain any non-Arabic expressions. The scholars also 
agree that there are some non-Arabic names in the Qur’an, 
such as Ibrahim (Abraham), Nidh (Noah) and Lit. They disagree 
over whether there is anything in it that is exclusively not 
Arabic, whereas Al-Baqillani and At-Tabari rejected this notion, 
saying, ‘What the Qur’4n contains of non-Arabic terms is 
shared between various languages.””’ 


Strah 1, Al-Fatihal (Part-1) 41 


The Tafsir of Surat Al-Fatihah 
(Chapter 1) 


Which was revealed in Makkah 


The Meaning of Al- 
— == || Fatihah and its 
Als ved || Various Names 
This Sdrah is called 
Al-Fatihah, that is, 
Aye ot it cr 2 the Opener of the 
CO! a Book, the Surah with 
(e) a = ce | which prayers are 
a oe Re begun. It is also 
A — iN 25 ate ee called, Umm AI-Kitab 
Ow del Opi enl (the Mother of the 
basi G) Sar3 SU a5 AU || Book), according to 
: the majority of the 
scholars. In an 
authentic Hadith 
recorded by At- 
Tirmidhi, who graded 
it Sahih, Abu 
Hurayrah said that 
the Messenger of 
Allah 3% said, 


Al saeltih 25 a Aish 

aly visi a5 oa 
cobalt Syd gtishi 

tAl-Hamdu lillahi Rabbil-‘Alamin is the Mother of the Qur'an, 


the Mother of the Book, and the seven repeated Ayat of the 
Glorious Qur'an.» 


Lt ot A @ EN Li 


It is also called Al-Hamd and As-Saidh, because the Prophet 
# said that his Lord said, 


cSealtht 25 a As Se OG BB hs se 355 aI Lach 


42 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
‘sae ates abt OU 


“The prayer (i.e., Al-Fatihah) is divided into two halves 
between Me and My servants.’ When the servant says, ‘All 
praise is due to Allah, the Lord of existence,’ Allah says, ‘My 
servant has praised Me.‘s!"! 


Al-Fatihah was called the Salah, because reciting it is a 
condition for the correctness of Salah - the prayer. Al-Fatihah 
was also called Ash-Shifa’ (the Cure). 

It is also called Ar-Ruqyah (remedy), since in the Sahih, there 
is the narration of Abu Said telling the the story of the 
Companion who used Al-Fatihah as a remedy for the tribal 
chief who was poisoned. Later, the Messenger of Allah 3 said 
to a Companion, tes ee 

035) tel A tagn 
‘How did you know that it is a Ruqyah?s!?) 


Al-Fatihah was revealed in Makkah as Ibn ‘Abbas, Qatadah 
and Abu Al-‘Aliyah stated. Allah said, 


ai i SESE Sy 
¢And indeed, We have bestowed upon you the seven Mathani> 


(seven repeatedly recited verses), (i.e. Sdrat Al-Fdtihah) 
(15:87).'5! Allah knows best. 


How many Ayat does Al-Fatihah contain? 


There is no disagreement over the view that Al-Fdatihah 
contains seven Aydt. According to the majority of the reciters 
of Al-Kifah, a group of the Companions, the Tabi‘iin, and a 
number of scholars from the successive generations, the 
Bismillah is a separate Ayah in its beginning. We will mention 
this subject again soon, if Allah wills, and in Him we trust. 


The Number of Words and Letters in Al-Fatihah 


The scholars say that Al-Fatihah consists of twenty-five 
words, and that it contains one hundred and thirteen letters. 


"Il At-Tirmidhi, Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 8 :283. 

(21 Fath Al-Bari 4:529. 

[3] That is, because this Ayah, which refers to Al-Fatihah, was itself 
revealed in Makkah. 


Strah 1, Al-Fatihah (Part-1 43 


The Reason it is called Umm Al-Kitab 


In the beginning of the Book of Tafsir, in his Sahih, Al- 
Bukhari said; “It is called Umm Al-Kitab, because the Qur’an 
starts with it and because the prayer is started by reciting 
it." It was also said that it is called Umm Al-Kitab, because 
it contains the meanings of the entire Qur’an. Ibn Jarir said, 
“The Arabs call every comprehensive matter that contains 
several specific areas an Umm. For instance, they call the skin 
that surrounds the brain, Umm Ar-Ra’s. They also call the flag 
that gathers the ranks of the army an Umm.” He also said, 
“Makkah was called Umm Al-Qurd, (the Mother of the Villages) 
because it is the grandest and the leader of all villages. It was 
also said that the earth was made starting from Makkah.”?! 

Further, Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah narrated 
about Umm Al-Qur’dan that the Prophet 2% said, 


call pes ey lial eel ny) ora 4 cP 
dt is Umm Al-Qur’an, the seven repeated (verses) and the 
Glorious Qur‘an 09) 
Also, Abu Jafar, Muhammad bin Jarir At-Tabari recorded 


Abu Hurayrah saying that the Messenger of Allah said about 
Al-Fatihah, 


«BES EN 9 GE SU 05 otal fl ga 


alt is Umm Al-Qur’an, Al-Fatihah of the Book (the Opener of 
the Qur’an) and the seven repeated (verses) .»!*) 


Virtues of Al-Fatihah 


Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal recorded in the Musnad that Abu 
Said bin Al-Mu‘alla said, “I was praying when the Prophet # 
called me, so I did not answer him until I finished the prayer. I 
then went to him and he said, ‘What prevented you from 
coming?» | said, ’O Messenger of Allah ! I was praying.’ He said, 
«Didn't Allah say, 


(1 Fath ALBari 8:6. 
[2] at-Tabari 1:107. 
[3] Ahmad 2:448. 

(41 at-Tabari 1:107. 


44 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
CRA 0 S65 Oy A006 A eae ie Sl ep 
€O you who believe! Answer Allah (by obeying Him) and (His) 


Messenger when he (32) calls you to that which gives you life?> 
He 38 then said, 
tel je CAS OS bd 3 nt hel tle 
«] will teach you the greatest Surah in the Qur'an before you leave the 
Masjid.» He held my hand and when he was about to leave the 


Masjid, | said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! You said: I will teach you 
the greatest Surah in the Qur’an.’ He said, «Yes.» 


4a Sy Slip 
(Al-Hamdu lillahi Rabbil-’Alamin»” 


? of, 22,38 “9, de one 
was) gill poe Stay std ES oe at 


wt is the seven repeated (verses) and the Glorious Qur'an that I 
was given v1] 

Al-Bukhari,!) Abu Dawud, An-Nasa and Ibn Majah'*! also 
recorded this Hadith. 

Also, Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah said, “The 
Messenger of Allah 2 went out while Ubayy bin Kab was 
praying and said, :O Ubayy!» Ubayy did not answer him. The 
Prophet #3 said, ‘O Ubayy!» Ubayy prayed faster then went to 
the Messenger of Allah # saying, ‘Peace be unto you, O 
Messenger of Allah!’ He said, «Peace be unto you. O Ubayy, what 
prevented you from answering me when I called you?» He said, ‘O 
Messenger of Allah! I was praying.’ He said, ‘Did you not read 
among what Allah has sent down to me,» 


reat (8 BS 1 HS  iegtcl 
¢Answer Allah (by obeying Him) and (His) Messenger when he 
(24) calls you to that which gives you life?» 
He said, ‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah! I will not do it again.’ the 
Prophet 2 said, 
11) Ahmad 4:211. 
71 Fath AL-Bari 8:6, 271. 
8! Abu Dawud 2:150, An-Nasai 2:139, and Ibn Majah 2:1244. 


Strah 1. Al-Fatihal (Part-1) 45 


V5 3 V5 BY 3 Vo sb sg VdIg doy Sel ot Loh 
eu, 835 
tWould you like me to teach you a Stirah the likes of which 
nothing has been revealed in the Tawrah, the Injil, the Zabur 
(Psalms) or the Furgan (the Qur’an)?» 
He said, ‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah!’ The Messenger of Allah 3% 
said, «I hope that I will not leave through this door until you have 
learned it.» He (Ka‘b) said, The Messenger of Allah held my 
hand while speaking to me. Meanwhile | was slowing down 
fearing that he might reach the door before he finished his 
conversation. When we came close to the door, I said: O 
Messenger of Allah ! What is the Surah that you have promised 
to teach me?’ He said, ‘What do you read in the prayer.» Ubayy 
said, ‘So I recited Umm Al-Qur’an to him.’ He 38 said, 


BMG 2 BG Lg V5 10,8 ga IGT GB silly» 

etch con wl yi ousalt 
«By Him in Whose Hand is my soul! Allah has never revealed 
in the Tawrah, the Injil, the Zabur or the Furqan a Surah like 
it. It is the seven repeated verses that I was given .?” 


Also, At-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith and in his narration, 
the Prophet # said, 

Eke) sill all oS) seal CEN be gp 

tt is the seven repeated verses and the Glorious Qur'an that I was 
given.» At-Tirmidhi then commented that this Hadith is Hasan 
Sahih." 

There is a similar Hadith on this subject narrated from Anas 
bin Malik'?} Further, ‘Abdullah, the son of Imam Ahmad, 
recorded this Hadith from Abu Hurayrah from Ubayy bin Kab, 
and he mentioned a longer but similar wording for the above 
Hadith.5! In addition, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasaii recorded this 
Hadith from Abu Hurayrah from Ubayy bin Ka‘b who said that 
the Messenger of Allah 2% said, 


(1 Ahmad 2:412, Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 8 :283. 
(2) Al-Hakim 1:560. 
(3) Ahmad 2:357 and 5:114. 


46 7 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Ab GEN Ct oa) oid FL LAN 3 5 52g at Ug we 
tsptias 2 sae on es de pds 
‘Allah has never revealed in the Tawrah or the Injil anything 


similar to Umm Al-Qur’an. It is the seven repeated verses and 
it is divided into tivo halves between Allah and His servant.» 


This is the wording reported by An-Nasai. At-Tirmidhi said 
that this Hadith is Hasan Gharib." 

Also, Imam Ahmad recorded that Ibn Jabir said, “I went to 
the Messenger of Allah 3 after he had poured water (for 
purification) and said, ‘Peace be unto you, O Messenger of 
Allah! He did not answer me. So I said again, ‘Peace be unto 
you, O Messenger of Allah!’ Again, he did not answer me, so I 
said again, ‘Peace be unto you, O Messenger of Allah!’ Still he 
did not answer me. The Messenger of Allah 2% went while I was 
following him, until he arrived at his residence. I went to the 
Masjid and sat there sad and depressed. The Messenger of 
Allah # came out after he performed his purification and said, 
‘Peace and Allah's mercy be unto you, peace and Allah's mercy be 
unto you, peace and Allah's mercy be unto you.» He then said, «O 
‘Abdullah bin Jabir! Should I inform you of the best Surah in the 
Qur’an?» I said, ‘Yes, O Messenger of Allah!’ He said, ‘Read, ‘All 
praise be to Allah, the Lord of the existence,’ until you finish it.» 
This Hadith has a good chain of narrators. 

Some scholars relied on this Hadith as evidence that some 
Ayat and Sdrahs have more virtues than others. 

Furthermore, in the chapter about the virtues of the Qur’an, 
Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Said Al-Khudri said, “Once, we 
were on a journey when a female servant came and said, ‘The 
leader of this area has been poisoned and our people are 
away. Is there a healer among you?’ Then a man whose 
healing expertise did not interest us stood for her, he read a 
Ruqyah for him, and he was healed. The chief gave him thirty 
sheep as a gift and some milk. When he came back to us we 
said to him, ‘You know of a (new) Ruqyah, or did you do this 
before?’ He said, I only used Umm Al-Kitab as Ruqyah.’ We 


") Tyhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8 :553 and An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubré 1:318. 
(2 Ahmad 4:177 and Al-Muwatta 1:84. 


Strah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 47 


said, ‘Do not do anything further until we ask the Messenger 
of Allah.’ When we went back to Al-Madinah we mentioned 
what had happened to the Prophet #%. The Prophet 2% said, 
tba Nip SI5 Nhedl 153 PT a At OE G0 
‘Who told him that it is a Ruqyah? Divide (the sheep) and 
reserve a share for me.0"''! 

Also, Muslim recorded in his Sahih, and An-Nasa’i in his 
Sunan that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “While Jibril (Gabriel) was with 
the Messenger of Allah 3%, he heard a noise from above. Jibril 
lifted his sight to the sky and said, This is a door in heaven 
being open, and it has never been opened before now.’ An angel 
descended from that door and came to the Prophet # and said, 
‘Receive the glad tidings of two lights that you have been given, 
which no other Prophet before you was given: the Opening of 
the Book and the last (three) Aydt of Surat Al-Bagarah. You will 
not read a letter of them, but will gain its benefit.’” This is the 
wording collected by An-Nasai (Al-Kubrad 5:12) and Muslim 
recorded similar wording (1:554). 


Al-Fatihah and the Prayer 
Muslim recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Prophet 
said, 
tpl be CoG Lie gh otal ff ga Lob bls le ya 
«Whoever performs any prayer in which he did not read Umm 
Al-Qur‘an, then his prayer is incomplete.» He said it thrice. 


Abu Hurayrah was asked, “(When] we stand behind the 
Imam?” He said, “Read it to yourself, for I heard the 
Messenger of Allah #% say, 


BG he G sails tides cate B55 ch Pad Cid sey in ae 
at 36 by ete Gas a JE GAT OS a LI 8 
ul SU el > Bee JE WB sate éfé al ar du msl 
DS Aes BE IE GE gate Gh Joh 1 Obs gate gis 
Leal bya 236 6b dL & gates gale ons SE 


"1 Fath AL-Bari 8 :671. 


48 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
16 GIG coh yA 28 og CAH ee 0 LEH 
dk & stay cass 13 + 2h 
*Allah, the Exalted, said, ‘I have divided the prayer (Al- 


Fatihah) into two halves between Myself and My servant, and 
My servant shall have what he asks for.’ 


If he says, 
Kick 25 a Lip 
€All praise and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of existence.» 
Allah says, ‘My servant has praised Mc.’ When the servant says, 
: ees gosl> 
<The Most Gracious, the Most Mercifiut.> 
Allah says, ‘My servant has glorified Me.’ When he says, 
dal JS ae 
<The Owner of the Day of Recompense.> 


Allah says, ‘My servant has glorified Me,’ or ‘My servant has related 
all matters to Me.’ When he says, 


ti BY) 45 3} 
€You (alone) we worship, and You (alone) we ask for help.> 


Allah says, ‘This is between Me and My servant, and My servant 
shall acquire what he sought.’ When he says, 


ee Beee 6 We we 
. 


ree ppl Je pyle COI Cal de, Gel Det talp 
C0 ACI 
<Guide us to the straight path. The way of those on whom You 


have granted Your grace, not (the way) of those who earned 
Your anger, nor of those who went astray>, 


Allah says, ‘This is for My servant, and My servant shall acquire 
what he asked for.’».” 

These are the words of An-Nasai, while both Muslim and 
An-Nasa4’ collected the following wording, “A half of it is for Me 
and a half for My servant, and My servant shall acquire what 


Sdrah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1 49 
he asked for.”!!! 


Explaining this Hadith 

The last Hadith used the word [Salah] ‘prayer’ in reference to 
reciting the Qur’an, (Al-Fatihah in this case) just as Allah said 
in another Ayah, 


or8t te 


€And offer your Salah (prayer) neither aloud nor in a low 
voice, but follow a way between .> 


meaning, with your recitation of the Qur’an, as the Sahih 
related from Ibn ‘Abbas.'7! Also, in the last Hadith, Allah said, 
“I have divided the prayer between Myself and My servant into 
two halves, a half for Me and a half for My servant. My 
servant shall have what he asked for.” Allah next explained 
the division that involves reciting Al-Fatihah, demonstrating 
the importance of reciting the Qur’an during the prayer, which 
is one of the prayer’s greatest pillars. Hence, the word ‘prayer’ 
was used here although only a part of it was actually being 
referred to, that is, reciting the Qur’an. Similarly, the word 
‘recite’ was used where prayer is meant, as demonstrated by 
Allah’s statement, 


Eile SE ABI OG 8 SAG SGSS> 
¢And recite the Qur'an in the early dawn. Verily, the recitation of the 
Qur'an in the early dawn is ever witnessed.» in reference to the 


Fajr prayer. The Two Sahihs recorded that the angels of the 
night and the day attend this prayer.!*! 


Reciting Al-Fatihah is required in Every Rak‘ah of the 
Prayer 


All of these facts testify to the requirement that reciting the 
Qur’an (Al-Fdtihah) in the prayer is required, and there is a 
consensus between the scholars on this ruling. The Hadith 
that we mentioned also testifies to this fact, for the Prophet # 
said, 


Ul Muslim 1:296, and An-Nasaii in Al-Kubraé 5:11,12. 
2] Fath Al-Bari 8 :257 
{3) Fath Al-Bari 8:251 and Muslim 1:439. 


i Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


igus oJ ofA th ys ba Sis Ne ym 
‘Whoever performs any prayer in which he did not recite Umm 
Al-Qur’in, his prayer is incomplete.»'! 
Also, the Two Sahihs recorded that ‘Ubadah bin As-Samit 
said that the Messenger of Allah 2 said, 


rts aul be I yd ile Vo 


(There is no prayer for whoever does not recite the Opening of 
the Book .»!?1 
Also, the Sahihs of Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Hibban recorded 
that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah 2% said, 


~ ae gt feos ree ; 
OA pl ya BBV bole toss Yo 


‘The pra er during which Umm Al-Qur'an is not recited is 
invalid .»!*) 


There are many other Hadiths on this subject. Therefore, 
reciting the Opening of the Book, during the prayer by the 
Imam and those praying behind him, is required in every 
prayer, and in every Rak‘ah. 


The Tafsir of Isti‘adhah (seeking Refuge) 
Allah said, 

a ohh % HER ty; WaT bh Aa, oh a Zp 
fey Ae te 4 &| aah LEG 
<Show forgiveness, enjoin what is good, and stay away from 
the foolish (i.e. don’t punish them). And if an evil whisper 
comes to you from Shaytan (Satan), then seek refuge with 
Allah. Verily, He is Hearing, Knowing} (7:199-200), 


SAAS H Bohs 6 ol BBA Scio Bh Gd 


donee IS A Leh Bac 
€Repel evil with that which is better. We are Best-Acquainted 


(1) Ahmad 2:250. 
(1 Fath Al-Bari 2:276 and Muslim 1 :295. 
'3] Ton Khuzaymah 1 :248, and Ibn Hibban 3:139. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah_(Part-1) a 51 


with things they utter. And say: “My Lord! I seek refuge with 
You from the whisperings (suggestions) of the Shayatin (devils). 
And I seek refuge with You, My Lord! lest they should come 
near me.’’» (23:96-98) and, 


77 tp yer 5 - 2 9G Bese vere A ter at are ae dh Tf eter 

Cua G5 As U5 A te Ay A Ga HE So & Mh gast> 

@ gel & GK Oy eke A EtG ee al yy 
CAN GS A) ath SE 


Repel (an evil) with one which is better, then verily he with 
whom there was enmity between you, (will become) as though 
he was a close friend. But none is granted it except those who 
are patient — and none is granted it except the owner of the 
great portion (of happiness in the Hereafter, i.e. Paradise and of 
a high moral character) in this world. And if an evil whisper 
from Shaytan tries to turn you away (O Muhammad #3) (from 
doing good), then seek refuge in Allah. Verily, He is the 
Hearing, the Knowing .> (41:34-36) 


These are the only three Aydt that carry this meaning. Allah 
commanded that we be lenient human enemy, so that his soft 
nature might make him an ally and a supporter. He also 
commanded that we seek refuge from the satanic enemy, 
because the devil does not relent in his enmity if we treat him 
with kindness and leniency. The devil only seeks the 
destruction of the Son of Adam due to the vicious enmity and 
hatred he has always had towards man’s father, Adam. Allah 
said, 

tii 3 KA GA neal Bee 9 ose > 
€O Children of Adam! Let not Shaytan deceive you, as he got 


your parents [Adam and Hawwa’ (Eve)] out of Paradise> 
(7:27), 


Zye he th re epee og 8hy, pate ya an oe cae 
ql Set SOS Ale 6h Cy le Sea 52 SI Sha yp 


<Surely, Shaytan is an enemy to you, so take (treat) him as an 
enemy. He only invites his Hizb (followers) that they may 
become the dwellers of the blazing Fire> (35:6) and, 


S7Led oe Be 527g 


£ 
ite Bs OS ea eee agen eA PgR Id ger 
YE Sab SE Se KADY) 393 of ACI A535 Hrascal> 


52 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


«Will you then take him (Iblis) and his offspring as protectors 
and helpers rather than Me while they are enemies to you? 
What an evil is the exchange for the Zalimiin (polytheists, and 
wrongdoers, etc) (18:50). 


The devil assured Adam that he wanted to advise him, but 
he was lying. Hence, how would he treat us after he had 
vowed, 


aN wm ate ° ne Gye Ot este hy << 
CMA HL De Ny anaes EZ Gh.d> 


<“By Your might, then I will surely, mislead them all. Except 
Your chosen servants among them (i.e. faithful, obedient, true 
believers of Islamic Monotheism).’’> (38:82-83) 


Also, Allah said, 
ae §ae nae <4 pede gle ae 


OM & A Ay et ott & ah Lech Oat OG yd 


wt OS 


ae SPA Oe AS Le A BG tee or 407 Chew 


Dd ¢ fer 30 foe ae 4, TAG view : 
oe ® OM Bil <ol eal Ly alee 24 dee Geol 


<So when you [want to] recite the Qur'an, seek refuge with 
Allah from Shaytan, the outcast (the cursed one). Verily, he 
has no power over those who believe and put their trust only in 
their Lord (Allah). His power is only over those who obey and 
follow him (Satan), and those who join partners with Him.> 
(16:98-100). 


Seeking Refuge before reciting the Qur’an 
Allah said, 
48) 050 gic & ah LEE OCI OG > 
So when you [want to] recite the Qur'an, seek refuge with 
Allah from Shaytiin, the outcast (the cursed one) .> 
meaning, before you recite the Qur’an. Similarly, Allah said, 


aS KA UE wait 25 yp 
When you intend to offer As-Salah (the prayer), wash your 
faces and your hands (forearms)> (5:6) 
meaning, before you stand in prayer, as evident by the 
Hadiths that we mentioned. Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu 
Said Al-Khudri said, “When the Messenger of Allah 3% would 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) ‘: 53 


stand up in prayer at night, he would start his prayer with the 
Takbir (saying “Allahu Akbar’, Allah is Greater) and would then 
supplicate, 


ee OG Bae Sy he 5185 Bag yi Gi 


‘All praise is due to You, O Allah, and also the thanks. 
Blessed be Your Name, Exalted be Your sovereignty, and there 
is no deity worthy of worship except You.» 


He 3% would then say thrice, 
ESE et YI a Yp 
‘There is no deity worthy of worship except Allah,». 
He 3% would then say, 


Wy Ay OLE Se aM ULE Se phell otlt ts 52h 


«| seek refuge with Allah, the Hearing, the Knowing, from the 
cursed Satan, from his coercion, lures to arrogance and 
poems .»,” 


The four collectors of the Sunan recorded this Hadith, which 
At-Tirmidhi considered the most famous Hadith on this 
subject!) 

Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah recorded that Jubayr bin Mut‘im 
said that his father said, “When the Messenger of Allah 2 
started the prayer, he said, 


- Heels BE ai Saw - OE - yas a La - bE - 5 53h don 
Cy sially 0558 Se pap MN OUbLEN Se Gh 2f pan - boi 
tAllah is the Greater, truly the Greatest (thrice); all praise is 
due to Allah always (thrice); and all praise is due to Allah day 
and night (thrice). O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the 
cursed Satan, from his Hamz, Nafkh and Nafth.».” 
‘Amr said, “The Hamz means asphyxiation, the Nafkh means 
arrogance, and the Najth means poetry.”?! Also, Ibn Majah 
recorded that ‘Ali bin Al-Mundhir said that Ibn Fudayl 
narrated that ‘Ata’ bin As-Sa’ib said that Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman 


(l Ahmad 3:69, Abu Dawud 1:490, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 2:47, An- 
Nasai 2:132, and Ibn Majah. 


21 Abu Dawud 1 :486 and Ibn Majah 1:265. 


54 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


As-Sulami said that Ibn Mas‘td said that the Prophet # said, 
C5 sills S285 pap SN OU EI Ge Sh S2f Ji Seb 
tO Allah! I seek refuge with You from the cursed devil, from 
his Hamz, Nafkh and Nafth.» 


He said, “The Hamz means death, the Nafkh means 
arrogance, and the Nafth means poetry.”!!! 


Seeking Refuge with Allah when One is Angry 

In his Musnad, Al-Hafiz Abu Yala Ahmad bin ‘Ali bin Al- 
Muthanna Al-Mawsili reported that Ubayy bin Ka‘b said, “Two 
men disputed with each other in the presence of the 
Messenger of Allah 3% and the nose of one of them became 
swollen because of extreme anger. The Messenger of Allah 3 
said, 

t! know of some words that if he said them, what he feels will 
go away, ‘I seek refuge with Allah from the cursed Satan.’»” 

An-Nasa7 also recorded this Hadith in his book, Al-Yawm 
wal-Laylah. |?) 

Al-Bukhari recorded that Sulayman bin Surad said, “Two 
men disputed in the presence of the Prophet # while we were 
sitting with him. One of them was cursing the other fellow and 
his face turned red due to anger. The Prophet 3% said, 


DULCE Sp sil S2F OU clay Ge Cad i Las EY 


Car SSI 
«I! know of a statement which if he said it, will make what he 


feels disappear, ‘] seek refuge with Allah from the cursed 
Satan.’ 


They said to the man, ‘Do you not hear what the Messenger of 
Allah is saying?’ He said, 1 am not insane.’” Also, Muslim, 
Abu Dawud and An-Nasa’i recorded this Hadith.'*! 


(1 Ibn Majah 1:266. 
(21 An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubra, no. 10233. 


3) Fath ALBari 6:388, Muslim 4:2015, Abu Dawud 5:140 and An- 
Nasaii in Al-Kubra. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 55 


There are many other Hadiths about seeking refuge with 
Allah. One can find this subject in the books on supplication 
and the virtues of righteous, good deeds. 


Is the Isti‘adhah (seeking Refuge) required? 


The majority of the scholars state that reciting the Isti‘adhah 
(in the prayer and when reciting the Qur’an) is recommended 
and not required, and therefore, not reciting it does not 
constitute a sin. However, Ar-Razi recorded that ‘Ata’ bin Abi 
Rab&h said that the Isti‘ddhah is required in the prayer and 
when one reads the Qur'an. In support of ‘Ata’s statement, Ar- 
Razi relied upon the apparent meaning of the Ayah, 


4153) 
<Then seek refuge .> 


He said that the Ayah contains a command that requires 
implementation. Also, the Prophet 3% always said the 
Isti‘@dhah. In addition, the Isti‘adhah wards off the evil of 
Satan, which is neccessary, the rule is that the means needed 
to implement a requirement of the religion is itself also 
required. And when one says, “I seek refuge with Allah from the 
cursed devil.” Then this will suffice. 


Virtues of the Isti‘addhah 


The Isti‘Gdhah cleanses the mouth from the foul speech that 
it has indulged in. It also purifies the mouth and prepares it 
to recite the speech of Allah. Further, the Isti‘a@dhah entails 
seeking Allah’s help and acknowledging His ability to do 
everything. The Isti‘adhah also affirms the servant’s meekness, 
weakness and inability to face the enemy of his inner evil, 
whom Allah alone, Who created this enemy, is able to repel 
and defeat. This enemy does not accept kindness, unlike the 
human enemy. There are three Aydt in the Qur’an that affirm 
this fact. Also, Allah said, 


Ry - Aye 1a § se os ei ne - 3 
Ca) Hy IG oh tye Bi SI se > 
<Verily, My servants (i.e. the true believers of Islamic 


Monotheism) — you have no authority over them. And 
sufficient is your Lord as a Guardian .> (17:65). 


We should state here that the believers, whom the human 


56 = Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


enemies kill, become martyrs, while those who fall victim to 
the inner enemy - Satan - become bandits. Further, the 
believers who are defeated by the apparent enemy - 
disbelievers - gain a reward, while those defeated by the inner 
enemy earn a sin and become misguided. Since Satan sees 
man where man cannot see him, it is befitting that the 
believers seek refuge from Satan with Whom Satan cannot see. 
The Isti‘a€dhah is a form of drawing closer to Allah and seeking 
refuge with Him from the evil of every evil creature. 


What does Isti‘ddhah mean? 


Isti‘adhah means, “I seek refuge with Allah from the cursed 
Satan so that he is prevented from affecting my religious or 
worldly affairs, or hindering me from adhering to what I was 
commanded, or luring me into what I was prohibited from.” 
Indeed, only Allah is able to prevent the evil of Satan from 
touching the son of Adam. This is why Allah allowed us to be 
lenient and kind with the human devil, so that his soft nature 
might cause him to refrain from the evil he is indulging in. 
However, Allah required us to seek refuge with Him from the 
evil of Satan, because he neither accepts bribes nor does 
kindness affect him, for he is pure evil. Thus, only He Who 
created Satan is able to stop his evil. This meaning is 
reiterated in only three Aydt in the Qur’an. Allah said in Surat 
ALA ‘raf, 


dict % oh ih oh Ba L> 
<Show forgiveness, enjoin what is good, and turn away from 
the foolish (i.e. don’t punish them).> (7:199) 
This is about dealing with human beings. He then said in 
the same Surah, 
qm Le feet Hl oh LEE BS Qhobt & ER Upp 
<And if an evil whisper comes to you from Shaytan, then seek 
refuge with Allah. Verily, He is Hearing, Knowing (7: 200).> 


Allah also said in Sdrat Al-Mu’miniin, 


Pa a ae + a a Oo Se an ae VOX ae Pvt be0 oye Sreqr ae once 
Same Se Ay al G5 G5 8 Gt UY lel o#@ RES BO @ Dh gold 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 57 


<Repel evil with that which is better. We are Best-Acquainted 
with the things they utter. And say: “My Lord! I seek refuge 
with You from the whisperings (suggestions) of the Shayatin 
(devils). And I seek refuge with You, My Lord! lest they should 
come near me.” (23 :96-98) .> 


Further, Allah said in Surat As-Sajdah, 


Ab 56 1G SY oil OE Sal @ St ex ol G cd 65 ¥5 
UY te ake ES A Lat ks aall Git oy ets Ay 

CLs GS 8 AL ah LEG BS iit 3 SEX 
<The good deed and the evil deed cannot be equal. Repel (the 
evil) with one which is better, then verily he, between whom 
and you there was enmity, (will become) as though he was a 
close friend. But none is granted it (the above quality) except 
those who are patient — and none is granted it except the 
owner of the great portion (of happiness in the Hereafter, i.e. 
Paradise and of a high moral character) in this world. And if an 
evil whisper from Shaytdn tries to turn you away (from doing 
good), then seek refuge in Allah. Verily, He is the Hearing, the 
Knowing> (41:34-36). 


Why the Devil is called Shaytan 


In the Arabic language, Shaytdn is derived from Shatana, 
which means the far thing. Hence, the Shaytdn has a different 
nature than mankind, and his sinful ways are far away from 
every type of righteousness. It was also said that Shaytan is 
derived from Shdta, (literally ‘burned)}, because it was created 
from fire. Some scholars said that both meanings are correct, 
although they state that the first meaning is more plausible. 
Further, Siybawayh (the renowned Arab linguistic) said, “The 
Arabs say, ‘So-and-so has Tashaytan,’ when he commits the 
act of the devils. If Shaytadn was derived from Shata, they 
would have said, Tashayyata (rather than Tashaytan).” Hence, 
Shaytan is derived from the word that means, far away. This 
is why they call those who are rebellious (or mischievous) from 
among the Jinns and mankind a ‘Shaytdn’. Allah said, 


wee Lage ae ae oe oe ft cg ee fae oe ster ote 
JA S55 ot I Ee ot ib yl Gb 02 3 le i> 
<h8 


58 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


€And so We have appointed for every Prophet enemies — 

Shayatin (devils) among mankind and Jinn, inspiring one 

another with adorned speech as a delusion (or by way of 

deception)» (6:112). 

In addition, the Musnad by Imam Ahmad records that Abu 
Dharr said that the Messenger of Allah # said, 


Cadls GI gb Se soy 35555 ul 


«© Abu Dharr! Seek refuge with Allah from the devils of 
mankind and the Jinns.» 


Abu Dharr said, “I asked him 2%, ‘Are there human devils?’ He 
said, ‘Yes.»"'] Furthermore, it is recorded in Sahih Muslim 
that Abu Dharr said that the Messenger of Allah 2% said, 


03501 CASI5 Stondty Sch sian hase 
‘The woman, the donkey and the black dog interrupt the prayer 


(if they pass in front of those who do not pray behind a Sutrah, 
i.e. a barrier) .» 


Abu Dharr said, “f said, ‘What is the difference between the 
black dog and the red or yellow dog?’ He said, 


wots 34241 Lip 
«The black dog is a devil.».”'?1 


Also, Ibn Jarir At-Tabari recorded that ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab 
once rode a Berthawn (huge camel) which started to proceed 
arrogantly. ‘Umar kept striking the animal, but the animal 
kept walking in an arrogant manner. Umar dismounted the 
animal and said, “By Allah! You have carried me on a 
Shaytdn. I did not come down from it until after I had felt 
something strange in my heart.” This Hadith has an authentic 
chain of narrators.'5! 


The Meaning of Ar-Rajim 
Ar-Rajim means, being expelled from all types of 
righteousness. Allah said, 


(1 Ahmad 5:178. 
21 Muslim 1:365. 
(3) At-Tabari 1:111. 


Sirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 59 


CEG Mss ES Go, CM Ket ap 


pe 


€And indeed We have adorned the nearest heaven with lamps, 
and We have made such lamps Rujuman (as missiles) to drive 
away the Shayatin (devils) (67:5). 

Alléh also said, 


oe 4 gee 5 GE 
WN DI Snt5 YE 32 


s2 


2 
> 


eb O06 ob HS ge Fon GRhRS 
<Verily, We have adorned the near heaven with the stars (for 
beauty). And to guard against every rebellious devil. They 
cannot listen to the higher group (angels) for they are pelted 
from every side. Outcast, and theirs is a constant (or painful) 
torment. Except such as snatch away something by stealing, 
and they are pursued by a flaming fire of piercing brightness> 
(37:6-10). 
Further, Allah said, 
We ht Fn Ss sk OS ee al g 
<And indeed, We have put the big stars in the heaven and We 
beautified it for the beholders. And We have guarded it (near 
heaven) from every Shaytan Rajim (outcast Shaytan). Except 
him (devil) who steals the hearing then he is pursued by a clear 
flaming fire.» (15:16-18). 
There are several similar Aydt. It was also said that Rajim 
means, the person who throws or bombards things, because 


the devil throws doubts and evil thoughts in people’s hearts. 
The first meaning is more popular and accurate. 


Bismillah is the First Ayah of Al-Fatihah 
The Companions started the Book of Allah with Bismillah: 
Osa a) al yp 


€1. In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most 
Merciful .> 


The scholars also agree that Bismillah is a part of an Ayah 


60 . Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


in Sdrat An-Naml (chapter 27). They disagree over whether it is 
a separate Ayah before every Stirah, or if it is an Ayah, or a 
part of an Ayah, included in every Surah where the Bismillah 
appears in its beginning. Ad-Daraqutni also recorded a Hadith 
from Abu Hurayrah from the Prophet # that supports this 
Hadith by Ibn Khuzaymah. Also, similar statements were 
attributed to ‘Ali, Ibn ‘Abbas and others.!! 

The opinion that Bismillah is an Ayah of every Surah, except 
Al-Bara’ah (chapter 9), was attributed to (the Companions) Ibn 
‘Abbas, Ibn ‘Umar, Ibn Az-Zubayr, Abu Hurayrah and ‘Ali. 
This opinion was also attributed to the Tabi‘in: ‘Ata’, Tawus, 
Said bin Jubayr, Makhal and Az-Zuhri. This is also the view 
of ‘Abdullah bin Al-Mubdrak, Ash-Shafii, Ahmad bin Hanbal, 
(in one report from him) Ishaq bin Rahwayh and Abu ‘Ubayd 
Al-Qasim bin Salam. On the other hand, Malik, Abu Hanifah 
and their followers said that Bismillah is not an Ayah in Al- 
Fatihah or any other Surah. Dawud said that it is a separate 
Ayah in the beginning of every Surah, not part of the Surah 
itself, and this opinion was also attributed to Ahmad bin 
Hanbal. 


Basmalah aloud in the Prayer 


As for Basmalah aloud during the prayer, those who did not 
agree that it is a part of Al-Fdtihah, state that the Basmalah 
should not be aloud. The scholars who stated that Bismillah is 
a part of every Surah (except chapter 9) had different opinions; 
some of them, such as Ash-Shafii, said that one should recite 
Bismillah with Al-Fatihah aloud. This is also the opinion of 
many among the Companions, the Tdbi‘in and the Imams of 
Muslims from the Salaf and the later generations. For 
instance, this is the opinion of Abu Hurayrah, Ibn ‘Umar, Ibn 
‘Abbas, Mu‘awiyah, ‘Umar and ‘Ali - according to Ibn ‘Abdul- 
Barr and Al-Bayhaqi. Also, the Four Khalifahs - as Al-Khatib 
reported - were said to have held this view although the report 
from them is contradicted. The Tabi‘in scholars who gave this 
Tafsir include Said bin Jubayr, Ikrimah, Abu Qilabah, Az- 
Zuhri, ‘Ali bin Al-Hasan, his son Muhammad, Sa‘id bin Al- 
Musayyib, ‘Ata’, Tawas, Mujahid, Salim, Muhammad bin Ka‘b 


(1) Ad-Daraqutni 1:303 and 306. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 61 


Al-Qurazi, Abu Bakr bin Muhammad bin ‘Amr bin Hazm, Abu 
Wa’il, Ibn Sirin, Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir, ‘Ali bin 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas, his son Muhammad, Nafi‘ the freed slave 
of Ibn ‘Umar, Zayd bin Aslam, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-Aziz, Al-Azraq 
bin Qays, Habib bin Abi Thabit, Abu Ash-Sha‘tha’, Makhul 
and ‘Abdullah bin Ma‘qil bin Mugarrin. Also, Al-Bayhaqi added 
‘Abdullah bin Safwan, and Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiyyah to 
this list. In addition, Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr added ‘Amr bin Dinar. 

The proof that these scholars relied on is that, since 
Bismillah is a part of Al-Fatihah, it should be recited aloud like 
the rest of Al-Fatihah. Also, An-Nas&’i recorded in his Sunan, 
Ibn Hibban and Ibn Khuzaymah in their Sahihs and Al-Hakim 
in the Mustadrak, that Abu Hurayrah once performed the 
prayer and recited Bismillah aloud. After he finished the 
prayer, he said, “Among you, I perform the prayer that is the 
closest to the prayer of the Messenger of Allah 2%.” Ad- 
Daraqutni, Al-Khatib and Al-Bayhaqi graded this Hadith 
Sahih"! Furthermore, in Sahih Al-Bukhari it is recorded that 
Anas bin Malik was asked about the recitation of the Prophet 
#3. He said, “His recitation was unhurried.” He then 
demonstrated that and recited, while lengthening the recitation 
of Bismillah Ar-Rahmdn Ar-Rahim,! Also, in the Musnad of 
Imam Ahmad, the Sunan of Abu Dawud, the Sahih of Ibn 
Hibban and the Mustadrak of Al-Hakim - it is recorded that 
Umm Salamah said, “The Messenger of Allah used to 
distinguish each Ayah during his recitation, 


Boal ae BS 
€In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. 
All praise and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists, 


the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. The Owner of the Day 
of Recompense .>” 


Ad-Daraqutni graded the chain of narration for this Hadith 


( An-Nasai 2:134, Ibn Khuzaymah 1:251, Ibn Hibban 3:143, Al- 
Hakim 1:232, Ad-Daraqutni 1:305, Al-Khatib and Al-Bayhaai 
2:46. 


[2] Fath ALBari 8 :709. 


62 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Sahin!) Furthermore, Imam Abu ‘Abdullah Ash-Shafii and Al- 
Hakim in his Mustadrak, recorded that Mu‘awiyah led the 
prayer in Al-Madinah and did not recite the Bismillah. The 
Muhdajirin who were present at that prayer criticized that. 
When Mu‘awiyah led the following prayer, he recited the 
Bismillah aloud.'! 

The Hadiths mentioned above provide sufficient proof for the 
opinion that the Bismillah is recited aloud. As for the opposing 
evidences and the scientific analysis of the narrations 
mentioned their weaknesses or otherwise it is not our desire 
to discuss this subject at this time. 

Other scholars stated that the Bismillah should not be 
recited aloud in the prayer, and this is the established practice 
of the Four Khalifahs, as well as ‘Abdullah bin Mughaffal and 
several scholars among the Tabi‘in and later generations. It is 
also the Madhhab (view) of Abu Hanifah, Ath-Thawri and 
Ahmad bin Hanbal. 

Imam Malik stated that the Bismillah is not recited aloud or 
silently. This group based their view upon what Imam Muslim 
recorded that ‘A’ishah said that the Messenger of Allah # used 
to start the prayer by reciting the Takbir (Allahu Akbar; Allah 
is Greater) and then recite, 


dead S & Ly 
€All praise and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists.> 
(Ibn Abi Hatim 1:12). 
Also, the Two Sahihs recorded that Anas bin Malik said, “I 


prayed behind the Prophet #3, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and Uthman 
and they used to start their prayer with, 


dak Sy 8 Lip 
All praise and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists.> 
Muslim added, “And they did not mention, 


(Ossi __ si al paemee’, 
€In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful 


1] Anmad 6:302, Abu Dawud 4:294, Ibn Khuzaymah 1:248, Al- 
Hakim 2 :231, Ad-Daraqutni 1 :307. 


2] Musnad ALImam Ash-Shaéfit 1:80, Al-Hakim 1 :233. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) : 63 


whether in the beginning or the end of the recitation.”!”! 
Similar is recorded in the Sunan books from ‘Abdullah bin 
Mughaffal, may Allah be pleased with him.!?! 

These are the opinions held by the respected Imams, and 
their statements are similar in that they agree that the prayer 
of those who recite Al-Fatihah aloud or in secret is correct. All 
the favor is from Allah. 


The Virtue of Al-Fatihah 


Imam Ahmad recorded in his Musnad, that a person who 
was riding behind the Prophet 3 said, “The Prophet’s animal 
tripped, so I said, ‘Cursed Shaytdn.’ The Prophet # said, 


SH S65 bus Silt pd iy OH Se de ve 
ui 


joel gt lai at ou SH by dep 
‘Do not say, ‘Cursed Shaytan,’ for if you say these words, 
Satan becomes arrogant and says, ‘With my strength I made 
him fall." When you say, ‘Bismillah,’ Satan will become as 


small as a fly.»!*! 


Further, An-Nasa’i recorded in his book Al-Yawm wal-Laylah, 
and also Ibn Marduwyah in his Tafsir that Usamah bin 
‘Umayr said, “I was riding behind the Prophet...” and he 
mentioned the rest of the above Hadith. The Prophet # said in 
this narration, 

at BE oat ty 8 3Sty cle 3% 2 thug Qi is jb ve 
‘Do not say these words, because then Satan becomes larger ; as 


") Fath Al-Bari 2:265, and Muslim 1:299. We should state that Al- 
Hafiz Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalani said in his book Buligh Al-Maram, 
“Ahmad, An-Nasa7i and Ibn Khuzaymah recorded this wording (for 
the Hadith above): They did not recite €3_s3i __ S9f 4! . > 
qin the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful 
aloud.’ In another narration by Ibn Khuzaymah, They used to 
recite it silently.’ This is the meaning intended (by the Hadith 
recorded by Muslim).” 


[2] At-Tirmidhi no. 244. 
'3] Ahmad 5:59. 


64 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


large as a house. Rather, say, ‘Bismillah,’ because Satan then 
becomes as small as a fly. »!") 


This is the blessing of reciting Bismillah. 


Basmalah is recommended before performing any Deed 


Basmalah (reciting Bismillah) is recommended before starting 
any action or deed. For instance, Basmalah is recommended 
before starting a Khutbah (speech). 

The Basmalah is also recommended before one enters the 
place where he wants to relieve himself, there is a Hadith 
concerning this practice.'?! Further, Basmalah is 
recommended at the beginning of ablution, for Imam Ahmad 
and the Sunan compilers recorded that Abu Hurayrah, Sa‘d 
bin Zayd and Abu Sa‘id narrated from the Prophet 3, 


cis du co 3 75 3)5,55 
(There is no valid ablution for he who did not mention Allah’s 
Name in it.»!9) 
This Hadith is Hasan (good). Also, the Basmalah is 
recommended before eating, for Muslim recorded in his Sahih 


that the Messenger of Allah # said to Umar bin Abi Salamah 
while he was a child under his care, 


«Say Bismillah, eat with your right hand and eat from 

whatever is next to you.0!*) 

Some of the scholars stated that Basmalah before eating is 
obligatory. Basmalah before having sexual intercourse is also 
‘recommended. The Two Sahihs recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas said 
that the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 


vty Subst che sgl at ty OG SBE ab SF sigh 0b Sash Of sh 
e1Sgh GUEE ohas 6 ly Us 5A by Sp 95 UG Suan 
0) An-Nasa’l in Al-Kubra 6:142. 
[2] ‘awn Al-Ma‘bad (the explanation of Sunan Abu Dawid) 1:6 


3] Apmad 3:41, Abu Dawud 1:75, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 1:115, An- 
Nasa7 1:61, and Ibn Majah 1:140 


[4] Muslim 3 :1600. 


Stirah 1, Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 65 


lf anyone of you before having sexual relations with his wife 
says, ‘In the Name of Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan 
and also protect what you grant us (meaning the coming 
offspring) from Satan,’ and if it is destined that they should 
have a child then, Satan will never be able to harm that 
child 0!) 


The Meaning of “Allah” 
Allah is the Name of the.Lord, the Exalted. It is said that 
Allah is the Greatest Name of Allah, because it is referred to 


when describing Allah by the various attributes. For instance, 
Allah said, 
“hth LE A TG Ct ss Hy ay ¥ GAN tp 
Ket pail srg Si ata Aa dat A a lll 
TY 4 patil Gul Bs aI A ae ce Bf go fect 
45S fall ENG oscal au dat Bi 
¢He is Allah, beside Whom La ildha illa Huwa (none has the 
right to be worshipped but He) the Knower of the unseen and 
the seen. He is the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. He is 
Allah, beside Whom La ildha illa Huwa, the King, the Holy, 
the One free from all defects, the Giver of security, the Watcher 
over His creatures, the Almighty, the Compeller, the Supreme. 
Glory be to Allah! (High is He) above all that they associate as 
partners with Him. He is Allah, the Creator, the Inventor of all 
things, the Bestower of forms. To Him belong the Best Names. 
All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify Him. And He is 
the Almighty, the Wise> (59:22-24). 
Hence, Allah mentioned several of His Names as Attributes 
for His Name Allah. Similarly, Allah said, 


40, 126 Soll AEN A> 
* €And (all) the Most Beautiful Names belong to Allah, so call 
on Him by them} (7:180), and, 


458i TON Gigs 6 GSS ET J HET > 


0] Fath ALBari9:136, Muslim 2:1058. 


66 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 


<Say (O Muhammad 32:) “Invoke Allah or invoke the Most 
Gracious (Allah), by whatever name you invoke Him (it is the 
same), for to Him belong the Best Names.’’» (17:110) 


Also, the Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that 
the Messenger of Allah #& said, 


5h Jos buasl is they Vy Bu tet pats; es i Sp 


‘Allah has ninety-nine Names, one hundred minus one, 
whoever counts (and preserves) them, will enter Paradise .»!") 
These Names were mentioned in a Hadith recorded by At- 
Tirmidhi!?! and Ibn Majah, and there are several differences 
between these two narrations. 


The Meaning of Ar-Rahmdn Ar-Rahim - the Most 
Gracious, the Most Merciful 


Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahim are two names derived from Ar- 
Rahmah (the mercy), but Rahman has more meanings that 
pertain to mercy than Ar-Rahim. There is a statement by Ibn 
Jarir that indicates that there is a consensus on this meaning. 
Further, Al-Qurtubi said, “The proof that these names are 
derived (from Ar-Rahmah), is what At-Tirmidhi recorded - and 
graded Sahih from ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Awf that he heard the 
Messenger of Allah 2% say, ae 

ehny Sab «etl cp Vet gh Sis, ooo CHS Bist Uf: Mus a Sth 

‘Allah the Exalted said, ‘I Am Ar-Rahman. I created the 
Raham (womb, i.e. family relations) and derived a name for it 
from My Name. Hence, whoever keeps it, I will keep ties to 
him, and whoever severs it, I will sever ties with him.’»'*! 

He then said, “This is a text that indicates the derivation.” He 
then said, “The Arabs denied the name Ar-Rahman, because of 
their ignorance about Allah and His attributes.” 

Al-Qurtubi said, “It was said that both Ar-Rahman and Ar- 
Rahim have the same meaning, such as the words Nadmdn 


1) Fath ALBari 11:218, Muslim 4:2062. 
7] Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 9 :480, and Ibn Majah 2:1269. 
(3) Tyhfat ALAhwadhi 6:33 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1 67 


and Nadim, as Abu Ubayd has stated. Abu ‘Ali Al-Farisi said, 
‘Ar-Rahman, which is exclusively for Allah, is a name that 
encompasses every type of mercy that Allah has. Ar-Rahim is 
what effects the believers, for Allah said, 


5 ST BEd 
€And He is ever Rahim (merciful) to the believers .>’ (33:43) 
Also, Ibn ‘Abbas said - about Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahim, They 
are two soft names, one of them is softer than the other 
(meaning it carries more implications of mercy).’ ! 

Ibn Jarir said; As-Surri bin Yahya At-Tamimi narrated to me 
that ‘Uthman bin Zufar related that Al-‘Azrami said about Ar- 
Rahman and Ar-Rahim, “He is Ar-Rahman with all creation 
and Ar-Rahim with the believers.”!?) Hence. Allah’s 
statements, 


St st & wl AD 


4Then He rose over (Istawa) the Throne (in a manner that 
suits His majesty), Ar-Rahman> (25:59),> and, 


QUE GN SEND 
€Ar-Rahman (Allah) rose over (Istawa) the (Mighty) Throne (in 
a manner that suits His majesty).> (20:5) 


Allah thus mentioned the Istawd - rising over the Throne - 
along with His Name Ar-Rahméan, to indicate that His mercy 
encompasses all of His creation. Allah also said, 


hes Se Sh teas 
«And He is ever Rahim (merciful) to the believers>, thus 
encompassing the believers with His Name Ar-Rahim. They said, 
“This testifies to the fact that Ar-Rahman carries a broader scope 
of meanings pertaining to the mercy of Allah with His creation in 
both lives. Meanwhile, Ar-Rahim is exclusively for the believers.” 
Yet, we should mention that there is a supplication that reads, 


Ceding BENG Gi git 
‘The Rahman and the Rahim of this life and the Hereafter» 


(1 Tafsir A-Qurtubi 1:105. 
[2] At-Tabari 1:127. 


68 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah’s Name Ar-Rahman is exclusively His. For instance, 
Allah said, 
gil TAT Gee GO Ser ge Sat gst Sp 
<Say (O Muhammad 2%): “Invoke Allah or invoke Ar-Rahman 
(Allah), by whatever name you invoke Him (it is the same), for 
to Him belong the Best Names> (17:110),> and, 


4BiGS A SS oo ot GETS & AS oe CSS JESp 
¢€And ask (O Muhammad #8) those of Our Messengers whom 

We sent before you: ‘Did We ever appoint alihah (gods) to be 

worshipped besides Ar-Rahman (Most Gracious, Allah)?’’> 

(43:45). 

Further, when Musaylimah the Liar called himself the 
Rahman of Yamamah, Allah made him known by the name 
‘Liar’ and exposed him. Hence, whenever Musaylimah is 
mentioned, he is described as ‘the Liar’. He became an 
example for lying among the residents of the cities and villages 
and the residents of the deserts, the bedouins. 

Therefore, Allah first mentioned His Name - Allah - that is 
exclusively His and described this Name by Ar-Rahman, which 
no one else is allowed to use, just as Allah said, 


get TAT ips Gf Sa ES fat ist Bp 
<Say (O Muhammad #8): “Invoke Allah or invoke Ar-Rahman 


(Allah), by whatever name you invoke Him (it is the same), for 
to Him belong the Best Names.”’> (17:110) 


Only Musaylimah and those who followed his misguided 
ways described Musaylimah by Ar-Rahmadn. 
As for Allah’s Name Ar-Rahim, Allah has described others by 
it. For instance, Allah said, 
eb ep BH Ook bs eel ts Fe Llp 
4225 5 aestll 
<Verily, there has come unto you a Messenger (Muhammad #3) 
from amongst yourselves (i.e. whom you know well). It grieves 
him that you should receive any injury or difficulty. He 
(Muhammad #3) is anxious over you (to be rightly guided) for 
the believers (he #% is) kind (full of pity), and Rahim 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah_(Part-1 69 


(merciful) (9:128). 

Allah has also described some of His creation using some of 
His other Names. For instance, Allah said, 

<Verily, We have created man from Nutfah (drops) of mixed 

semen (sexual discharge of man and woman), in order to try 

him, so We made him hearer (Sami') and seer (Basir) (76 :2). 

In conclusion, there are several of Allah’s Names that are 
used as names for others besides Allah. Further, some of 
Allah’s Names are exclusive for Allah alone, such as Allah, Ar- 
Rahman, Al-Khaliq (the Creator), Ar-Raziq (the Sustainer), and 
so forth. 

Hence, Allah started the Tasmiyah (meaning, ‘In the Name of 
Allah, Most Gracious Most Merciful) with His Name, Allah, 
and described Himself as Ar-Rahman, (Most Gracious) which 
is softer and more general than Ar-Rahim. The most honorable 
Names are mentioned first, just as Allah did here. 

A Hadith narrated by Umm Salamah stated that the 
recitation of the Messenger of Allah 3% was slow and clear, 
letter by letter, 


Ss @aldi 6 4 isi @rei st s ~ 3 
(QUA 5 oe Oi 


«In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. 
All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that 
exists. The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. The Owner of 
the Day of Recompense> (1:1-4). 


And this is how a group of scholars recite it. Others 
connected the recitation of the Tasmiyah to Al-Hamd. 


Oaiai  & Lap 
<2. Al-Hamd be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists.> 
The Meaning of Al-Hamd 


Abu Ja‘far bin Jarir said, “The meaning of 


4 kip 


70 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢Al-Hamdu Lillah> (all praise and thanks be to Allah) is: all 
thanks are due purely to Allah, alone, not any of the objects 
that are being worshipped instead of Him, nor any of His 
creation. These thanks are due to Allah’s innumerable favors 
and bounties, that only He knows the amount of. Allah’s 
bounties include creating the tools that help the creation 
worship Him, the physical bodies with which they are able to 
implement His commands, the sustenance that He provides 
them in this life, and the comfortable life He has granted them, 
without anything or anyone compelling Him to do so. Allah also 
warned His creation and alerted them about the means and 
methods with which they can earn eternal dwelling in the 
residence of everlasting happiness. All thanks and praise are 
due to Allah for these favors from beginning to end.”!! 
Further, Ibn Jarir commented on the Ayah, 


443 Lip 


¢Al-Hamdu Lillah>, that it means, “A praise that Allah praised 
Himself with, indicating to His servants that they too should 
praise Him, as if Allah had said, ‘Say: All thanks and praise is 
due to Allah.’ It was said that the statement, 


(6 cai 


€All praise and thanks be to Allah>, entails praising Allah by 
mentioning His most beautiful Names and most honorable 
Attributes. When one proclaims, ‘All thanks are due to Allah,’ 
he will be thanking Him for His favors and bounties.” !?! 


The Difference between Praise and Thanks 


Hamd is more general, in that it is a statement of praise for 
one’s characteristics, or for what he has done. Thanks are 
given for what was done, not merely for characteristics. 


The Statements of the Salaf about Al-Hamd 


Hafs mentioned that ‘Umar said to ‘Ali, “We know La ilaha 
ilallah, Subhan Alidh and Allahu Akbar. What about Al- 
Hamdu Lilladh?” ‘Ali said, “A statement that Allah liked for 


(l At-Tabari 1:135. 
[21 At-Tabari 1 :137. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 71 
Himself, was pleased with for Himself and He likes that it be 
repeated.”'] Also, Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Al-Hamdu Liliah is the 
statement of appreciation. When the servant says Al-Hamdu 
Lillah, Allah says, ‘My servant has praised Me.” Ibn Abi Hatim 
recorded this Hadith.|?! 


The Virtues of Al-Hamd 

Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal recorded that Al-Aswad bin Sari‘ 
said, “I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Should I recite to you 
words of praise for My Lord, the Exalted, that I have 
collected?’ He said, 

«Verily, your Lord likes Al-Hamd.»” 

An-Nasai also recorded this Hadith.§! Furthermore, Abu ‘Isa 
At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa’i and Ibn Majah recorded that Musa bin 
Ibrahim bin Kathir related that Talhah bin Khirash said that 
Jabir bin ‘Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 

ag Acct tea Laity a Yi dy ¥ Si Lath 

«The best Dhikr (remembering Allah) is La ilaha illallah and the 

best supplication is Al-Hamdu Lillah » 

At-Tirmidhi said that this Hadith is Hasan Gharib. “| Also, 
Ibn Majah recorded that Anas bin Malik said that the 
Messenger of Allah 2 said, 

toe ait Lal ih SG Wy i ish Su Gee fe a dt 

«No servant is blessed by Allah and says,"Al-Hamdu Lillah’, 


except that what he was given is better than that which he has 
himself acquired .»'*! 


Further, in his Sunan, Ibn Majah recorded that Ibn ‘Umar 


IM At-Tabari. 1:15. 
[21 thid. 1:13. 
[3] Ahmad 3:435, and An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubra 4:416. 


(41 Typfat Al-Ahwadhi 9 :324, An-Nasai in Al-Kubré 6 :208, Ibn Majah 
2:1249. 


(S] Ibn Majah 2:1250 


72 * Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
said that the Messenger of Allah 2% said, 
pate ets JE AE GS AS B55 GE ait ote ty Ute Sp 
eV a tind wks OF Gk 6G wich clad aol 
OMe OU Gy ple 3b5 al IE AK GS gi ¥ Te 36 Hike & 
JI BE GS Sy GAs SF 50 25 ye YG ecute bE bu 
sl S gas JUGS WE EA GI OW Goble bes yt; 


“A servant of Allah once said, ‘O Allah! Yours is the Hamd 
that is suitable for the grace of Your Face and the greatness of 
Your Supreme Authority.’ The two angels were confused as to 
how to write these words. They ascended to Allah and said, ‘O 
our Lord! A servant has just uttered a statement and we are 
unsure how to record it for him.’ Allah said while having more 
knowledge in what His servant has said, ‘What did My servant 
say?’ They said, ‘He said, ‘O Allah! Yours is the Hamd that is 
suitable for the grace of Your Face and the greatness of Your 
Supreme Authority.’ Allah said to them, ‘Write it as My 
servant has said it, until he meets Me and then I shall reward 
him for ito!) 


Al before Hamd encompasses all Types of Thanks and 
Appreciation for Allah 


The letters Alif and Lam before the word Hamd serve to 


“encompass all types of thanks and appreciation for Allah, the 
Exalted. A Hadith stated, 


. rae & eS fae” 3 2 eye oe 2 os 22 2s 
BY sp Boy OS 355 Bu as i a, a Stadt ai pun 


obs 


dals 


«O Allah! All of Al-Hamd is due to You, You own all the 
ownership, all Eppes of good are in Your Hand and all affairs 
belong to You.»! 


"1 thn Majah 2:1249. 
[2] At-Targhib wat-Tarhib 2 :253. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah_(Part-1) 73 


The Meaning of Ar-Rabb, the Lord 


Ar-Rabb is the owner who has full authority over his 
property. Ar-Rabb, linguistically means, the master or the one 
who has the authority to lead. All of these meanings are 
correct for Allah. When it is alone, the word Rabb is used only 
for Allah. As for other than Allah, it can be used to say Rabb 
Ad-Dar, the master of such and such object. Further, it was 
reported that Ar-Rabb is Allah’s Greatest Name. 


The Meaning of Al-‘Alamin 


Al-‘Alamin is plural for ‘Alam, which encompasses everything 
in existence except Allah. The word ‘Alam is itself a plural 
word, having no singular form. The ‘Alamin are different 
creations that exist in the heavens and the earth, on land and 
at sea. Every generation of creation is called an ‘Alam. Al- 
Farra‘ and Abu ‘Ubayd said, “‘Alam includes all that has a 
mind, the Jinns, mankind, the angels and the devils, but not 
the animals.” Also, Zayd bin Aslam and Abu Muhaysin said, 
‘Alam includes all that Allah has created with a soul.” Further, 
Qatadah said about, Dons 

€inekell Gop 


<The Lord of the ‘Alamin>, “Every type of creation is an ‘Alam.” 
Az-Zajjaj also said, “Alam encompasses everything that Allah 
created, in this life and in the Hereafter.” Al-Qurtubi 
commented, “This is the correct meaning, that the ‘Alam 
encompasses everything that Allah created in both worlds. 
Similarly, Allah said, 


dinate AF of GEG BNE oct 5 56 elit 35 U5 yes Sup 


<Fir‘awn (Pharaoh) said: “And what is the Lord of the 
‘Alamin?”’ Miisa (Moses) said: ‘The Lord of the heavens and 
the earth, and all that is between them, if you seck to be 
convinced with certainty” (26:23-24). 


Why is the Creation called ‘Alam? 


‘Alam is derived from ‘Alamah, that is because it is a sign 
testifying to the existence of its Creator and to His 
Oneness.”"! 


(4 Al-Qurtubi 1:139. 


74 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


CB hid 
43. Ar-Rahman (the Most Gracious), Ar-Rahim (the Most 
Merciful)p. Allah said next, 
5g 

€Ar-Rahman (the Most Gracious), Ar-Rahim (the Most Merciful)> 
We explained these Names in the Basmalah. Al-Qurtubi said, 
“Allah has described Himself by ‘Ar-Rahmdn, Ar-Rahim’ after 
saying ‘the Lord of the Alamin’, so His statement here includes 
a warning, and then an encouragement. Similarly, Allah said, 


Arte ch Bae 


CEA SC ys 1G AL ST fl coats ted 
«Declare (O Muhammad 2%) unto My servants, that truly, I 
am the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful. And that M 
torment is indeed the most painful torment.> (15:49-50)!! 
Allah said, 

$05 is Ball ba 5 SD 
<Surely, your Lord is swift in retribution, and certainly He is 
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.> (6:165) 

Hence, Rabb contains a warning while Ar-Rahmadn Ar-Rahim 
encourages. Further, Muslim recorded in his Sahih that the 
Messenger of Allah 3 said, 

Ue Jat oles gy ach ke 6 ab GEES ait Be G Foph he gh 

el eit be LG GLEN iy al Be 
«lf the believer knew what punishment Allah has, none would 
have hope in acquiring His Paradise, and if the disbeliever knew 
what mercy Allah has, none will lose hope of earning His 


earning .1!? et Nee, 
<p 22 Hed 
€4. The Owner of the Day of Recompense.> 
Indicating Sovereignty on the Day of Judgment 
Allah mentioned His sovereignty of the Day of Resurrection, 


() Ibid. 
2} Muslim 4:2109. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 75 


but this does not negate His sovereignty over all other things. 
For Allah mentioned that He is the Lord of existence, including 
this earthly life and the Hereafter. Allah only mentioned the 
Day of Recompense here because on that Day, no one except 
Him will be able to claim ownership of anything whatsoever. 
On that Day, no one will be allowed to speak without His 
permission. Similarly, Allah said, 


CHGgs JG I Tas ey pk, Ye Kay Chik wD 
The Day that Ar-Rih (Jibril (Gabriel) or another angel) and 
the angels will stand forth in rows, they will not speak except 
him whom the Most Gracious (Allah) allows, and he will speak 
what is right.> (78:38), 


405 Sy £25 i i BT oats 


€And all voices will be humbled for the Most Gracious (Allah), 
and nothing shall you hear but the low voice of their 
footsteps.>(20:108), and, 


45s BE HS st, Vy ES JS Ob > 
€On the Day when it comes, no person shall speak except by 
His (Allah's) leave. Some among them will be wretched and 
(others) blessed} (11:105). 
Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “Allah says, 


‘On that Day, no one owns anything that they used to own in 
the world.’” 


The Meaning of Yawm Ad-Din 


Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Yawm Ad-Din is the Day of Recompense for 
the creatures, meaning the Day of Judgment. On that Day, Allah 
will reckon the creation for their deeds, evil for evil, good for 
good, except for those whom He pardons.”"! In addition, several 
other Companions, Tdbi‘in and scholars of the Salaf, said 
similarly, for this meaning is apparent and clear from the Ayah. 


Allah is Al-Malik (King or Owner) 
Allah is the True Owner (Malik) (of everything and everyone). 
Allah said, 


(1! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:19. 


76 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Keheat Aya Syst Vy hy Y oll ait sap 
€He is Allah, beside Whom La ilaha illa Huwa, the King, the 


Holy, the One free from all defects> (59:23). 
Also, the Two Sahihs recorded Abu Hurayrah saying that 


the Prophet 3 said, 
eft Vy Gute Vg SCV ge, 5 5 ait he ct Ath 
‘The most despicable name to Allah is a person who calls 
himself the king of kings, while there are no owners except 


Allah ot 
Also the Two Sahihs recorded that the Messenger of Allah 2% 


said, 
A sf dud cf 58 fe en og biy GaN Gn Jad 

83,7551 Sf eS 3a gf eosV 
«(On the Day of Judgement) Allah will grasp the earth and fold 


up the heavens with His Right Hand and proclaim, 'I Am the 
King! Where are the kings of the earth? Where are the tyrants? 


Where are the arrogant?'s'1 
Also, in the the Glorious Qur'an; 
408 205 & EA OH A> 
«Whose is the kingdom this Day? Allah’s, the One, the 


Irresistible .>(40: 16). 
As ior calling someone other than Allah a king in this life, 
then it is done as a figure of speech. For instance, Allah said, 


465 ENG ceed 35 53 ST YD 
<Indeed Allah appointed Talut (Saul) as a king over you.> 
(2:247), 

aus Als SGD 
€As there was a king behind them>(18:79), and, 
C6 Kies IK 5 


(1) Fath AL-Bari 1:604 and Muslim 3:1688. 
[2] Fath AL-Bari 13 :404 and Muslim 4:2148. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 77 


When He made Prophets among you, and made you kings} (5:20). 
Also, the Two Sahihs recorded, 


re Le OO 


tJust like kings reclining on their throness!) 


The Meaning of Ad-Din 
Ad-Din means the reckoning, the reward or punishment. 
Similarly, Allah said, 
4K io Oh RD 
€On that Day Allah will pay them the (Dinahum) recompense 
(of their deeds) in full> (24:25), and, 


<Shall we indeed (be raised up) to receive reward or punishment 
(according to our deeds)?> (37:53). A Hadith stated, 


te gill I US obs Sod O08 5 Ko 

‘The wise person is he who reckons himself and works for (his 

life) after death .»'?1 
meaning, he holds himself accountable. Also, ‘Umar said, 
“Hold yourself accountable before you are held accountable, 
weigh yourselves before you are weighed, and be prepared for 
the biggest gathering before He Whose knowledge encompasses 
your deeds, 

€That Day shall you be brought to Judgement, not a secret of 

yours will be hidden} (69:18).” 

tBb 3 BY As Gp 


SS 


45. You we worship, and You we ask for help.} (1:5) 


The Linguistic and Religious Meaning of ‘bddah 
Linguistically, Ibddah means subdued. For instance, a road 


() Fath Al-Bari 6:89 and Muslim 3:1518. 
7} thn Majah 2:1423. 


78 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


is described as Mu‘abbadah, meaning, ‘paved’. In religious 
terminology, ‘Ibddah implies the utmost love, humility and fear. 


The Merit of stating the Object of the Action before the 
Doer of the Act, and the Merit of these Negations 


uy 


“You...”, means, we worship You alone and none else, and 
rely on You alone and none else. This is the perfect form of 
obedience and the entire religion is implied by these two ideas. 
Some of the Salaf said, Al-Fdtihah is the secret of the Qur’an, 
while these words are the secret of Al-Fatihah, 


C25 BGS 5 Bap 
45. You we worship, and You we ask for help from.> 


The first part is a declaration of innocence from Shirk 
(polytheism), while the second negates having any power or 
strength, displaying the recognition that all affairs are 
controlled by Allah alone. This meaning is reiterated in various 
instances in the Qur’an. For instance, Allah said, 

ih is, 5 Us Bo JES Saab 

€So worship Him (O Muhammad 3%) and put your trust in 

Him. And your Lord is not unaware of what you (people) do.> 

(11:123), 


CG es oy Coe 55K BD 


«Say: “He is the Most Gracious (Allah), in Him we believe, 
and in Him we put our trust.”> (67:29), 


CUIG HE AI GT Alb ox 2p 
<(He alone is) the Lord of the east and the west; La ilaha illa 


Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). So take 
Him alone as Wakil (Disposer of your affairs)>, (73:9), and, 
pans BG As SGD 
€You we worship, and You we ask for help from>. 


We should mention that in this Ayah, the type of speech 
here changes from the third person to direct speech by using 
the Kaf in the statement Iyydka (You). This is because after 
the servant praised and thanked Allah, he stands before Him, 


Sirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 79 
addressing Him directly; 
585 Ys As BD 
€You we worship, and You we ask for help from>. 


Al-Fatihah indicates the Necessity of praising Allah. It 
is required in every Prayer. 


The beginning of Strat Al-Fatihah contains Allah’s praise for 
Himself by His most beautiful Attributes and indicates to His 
servants that, they too, should praise Him in the same 
manner. Hence, the prayer is not valid unless one recites Al- 
Fatihah, if he is able. The Two Sahihs recorded that ‘Ubadah 
bin As-Samit said that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, 


til au be Bd ble 
‘There is no valid prayer for whoever does not recite Al-Fatihah 
of the Book .»!"1 
Also, it is recorded in Sahih Muslim that Abu Hurayrah 
said that the Messenger of Allah 2 said, 


G1 JG aA OS) a LH cash SU dk & atts eats 

OE Gb sae gle Ah sa JU Lt et dE i sate Gas 
BOS AS BG 230 ty gate gate ar OE ttl OF ate 
Liat Gaal: 56 bp IG & cates (GME B55 oh Wb 00 G5 
AIS cyl oA Jo aye Cl Sail be. ofl 

OSE cats gad a 8 

‘Allah said, ‘I divided the prayer into two halves between 

Myself and My servant, one half is for Me and one half for My 


servant. My servant shall have what he asks for.’ When the 
servant says, 


Kini S) oy Lip 
All praise and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of all that exists.>, 


0) Fath Al-Bari 2:276 and Muslim 1:295. 


80 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah says, ‘My servant has praised Me.’ When the servant says, 
<The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful>, Allah says, ‘My 
servant has praised Me.’ When the servant says, 

1 AN oe ed 
<The Owner of the Day of Recompense>, Allah says, ‘My 
servant has glorified Me.’ If the servant says, 


2 G25 BG 28 A> 
€You we worship, and You we ask for help», Allah says, ‘This 
is between Me and My servant, and My servant shall have 
what he asked.’ If the servant says, 
rake gycaull 2 gil Sao bee ee N digit ats ' 
<Guide us to the straight path. The path of those on whom You 
have bestowed Your grace, not (that) of those who have earned 


Your anger, nor of those who went astray», Allah says, ‘This is 
for My servant, and My servant shall have what he asked .’1"") 


Tawhid Al-Ulihiyyah 
Ad-Dahhak narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
42s By 
€You we worship> means, “It is You whom we single out, Whom we 
fear and Whom we hope in, You alone, our Lord, and none else. 


Tawhid Ar-Rubuibiyyah 
ti SUS) 


<And You we ask for help from>, to obey you and in all of 
our affairs.”?! Further, Qatadah said that the Ayah, 


4255 DG oS BG> 


111 Muslim 1:297. 
[2] thn Abi Hatim 1:19. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 81 


€You we worship, and You we ask for help from> “Contains Allah’s 
command to us to perform sincere worship for Him and to seek 
His aid concerning all of our affairs.) Allah mentioned, 


BIOS Aw 


das ALY 
€You we worship> before, 
dis BS 


¢And You we ask for help from}, because the objective here is the 
worship, while Allah’s help is the tool to implement this 
objective. Certainly, one first takes care of the most important 
aspects and then what is less important, and Allah knows best. 


Allah called His Prophet #: an ‘Abd 
Allah called His Messenger # an ‘Abd (servant) when He 
mentioned sending down His Book, the Prophet’s involvement 
in inviting to Him, and when mentioning the Isrd’ (overnight 
journey from Makkah to Jerusalem and then to heaven), and 
these are the Prophet’s most honorable missions. Allah said, 
CSE 12 § Hi okt 4 cy 


€All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who has sent down to His 
servant (Muhammad 2) the Book (the Qur’dn)> (18:1), 


diei ol 32 16 Gp 
€And when the servant of Allah (Muhammad #3) stood up 
invoking Him (his Lord — Allah in prayer)>, (72:19) and, 
455 sat, Ai coal GEL 
€Glorified (and Exalted) be He (Allah) (above all that they 


associate with Him) Who took His servant (Muhammad 22) for 
a journey by night} (17:1). 


Encouraging the Performance of the Acts of Worship 
during Times of Distress 


Allah also recommended that His Prophet # resort to acts of 
worship during times when he felt distressed because of the 


Ul thid. 1:20. 


82 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
disbelievers who defied and denied him. Allah said, 
thal ak EH 
«Indeed, We know that your breast is straitened at what they 
say. So glorify the praises of your Lord and be of those who 
prostrate themselves (to Him). And worship your Lord until 
there comes unto you the certainty (i.e. death)» (15:97-99). 
Why Praise was mentioned First 


Since the praise of Allah, Who is being sought for help, was 
mentioned, it was appropriate that one follows the praise by 
asking for his need. We stated that Allah said, 


Wk & SHAS «Gan Gis ais J Gi ‘2350 

‘One half for Myself and one half for My servant, and My 

servant shall have what he asked.» 

This is the best method for seeking help, by first praising 
the one whom help is sought from and then asking for His 
aid, and help for one’s self, and for his Muslim brethren by 
saying. 

<p Lea acl 
Guide us to the straight path.> 

This method is more appropriate and efficient in bringing 
about a positive answer to the pleas, and this is why Allah 
recommended this better method. 

Asking for help may take the form of conveying the condition 


of the person who is seeking help. For instance, the Prophet 
Moses said, 


<My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good that You 
bestow on me!> (28:24). 


Also, one may first mention the attributes of whoever is 
being asked, such as what Dhun-Nian said, 


2, ps “4 


dull & Le. 3 HS AY ah Vp 
<La ilaha illa Anta (none has the right to be worshipped but 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 83 


they associate with You)! Truly, I have been of the wrongdoers> 
(21:87). 


Further, one may praise Him without mentioning what he 
needs. 
The Meaning of Guidance mentioned in the Sérah 


The guidance mentioned in the Sdrah implies being directed 
and guided to success. Allah said, 


42 Leal talp 
<Guide us to the straight path> meaning guide, direct, lead and 
grant us the correct guidance. Also, 
4h gil 1555 
¢And shown him the two ways (good and evil)?> (90:10), means, 
‘We explained to him the paths of good and evil.’ Also, Allah 
said, 
gift pe dy Biss S21 
«He (Allah) chose him (as an intimate friend) and guided him 
to a straight path> (16:121), and, 
€ ool die J Atal > 
¢And lead them on to the way of flaming Fire (Hell) (37:23). 
Similarly, Allah said, 
48 pre I oad Syd 
¢And verily, you (O Muhammad 2%) are indeed guiding 
(mankind) to the straight path> (42:52), and, 
469 2 oii 2 acdip> 
<All praise and thanks be to Allah, Who has guided us to this> 
(7:43), 
meaning, guided us and directed us and qualified us for this 
end - Paradise. 
The Meaning of As-Sirdt Al-Mustagim, the Straight 
Path. 
As for the meaning of As-Sirdt Al-Mustaqim, Imam Abu Ja‘far 


84 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


At-Tabari said, “The Ummah agreed that Siradt Al-Mustagim, is 
the clear path without branches, according to the language of 
the Arabs. For instance, Jarir bin ‘Atiyah Al-Khatafi said in a 
poem, The Leader of the faithful is on a path that will remain 
straight even though the other paths are crooked.” At-Tabari 
also stated that, “There are many evidences to this fact.” At- 
Tabari then proceeded, “The Arabs use the term, Sirdat in 
reference to every deed and statement whether righteous or 
wicked. Hence the Arabs would describe the honest person as 
being straight and the wicked person as being crooked. The 
straight path mentioned in the Qur’an refers to Islam.!! 
Imam Ahmad recorded in his Musnad that An-Nawwas bin 
Sam‘an said that the Prophet 3 said, 
1d tgs obo bia Se ley ee thie KE an O55 
SG ait 348 5 bia ou ky HEY he I Jey ike 
SF BE bia GS be i gly te YG Ket Dien lbs 
Ab 688 by Gib Ge Y day sdb Sig db bb ais Sf busy) 
35 bl pyle EE Sigg at 44 295,45 SEY - bre 
i tl heel bia S55 be ely at Ses byt AG le Cetin 


‘Allah has set an example: a Sirat (straight path) that is 
surrounded by two walls on both sides, with several open doors 
within the walls covered with curtains. There is a caller on the 
gate of the Sirat who heralds, ‘O people! Stay on the path and 
do not deviate from it.’ Meanwhile, a caller from above the path 
is also warning any person who wants to open any of these 
doors, ‘Woe unto you! Do not open it, for if you open it you 
will pass through.’ The straight path is Islam, the two walls are 
Allah's set limits, while the doors resemble what Allah has 
prohibited. The caller on the gate of the Sirat is the Book of 
Allah, while the caller above the Sirat is Allah’s admonishment 
in the heart of every Muslim .»'?! 


(1) At-Tabari 1:170. 
2) Ahmad 4:182. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 85 


The Faithful ask for and abide by Guidance 


If someone asks, “Why does the believer ask Allah for 
guidance during every prayer and at other times, while he is 
already properly guided? Has he not already acquired 
guidance?” 

The answer to these questions is that if it were not a fact 
that the believer needs to keep asking for guidance day and 
night, Allah would not have directed him to invoke Him to 
acquire the guidance. The servant needs Allah the Exalted 
every hour of his life to help him remain firm on the path of 
guidance and to make him even more firm and persistent on 
it. The servant does not have the power to benefit or harm 
himself, except by Allah’s permission. Therefore, Allah directed 
the servant to invoke Him constantly, so that He provides him 
with His aid and with firmness and success. Indeed, the 
happy person is he whom Allah guides to ask of Him. This is 
especially the case if a person urgently needs Allah’s help day 
or night. Allah said, 


2 44 


oll Sealy 25 & I oS SSG watts ol Uc Gan Salt Gp 
433 & SA 
¢O you who believe! Believe in Allah, and His Messenger 
(Muhammad 2%), and the Book (the Qur'an) which He has sent 
down to His Messenger, and the Scripture which He sent down 
to those before (him)> (4:16). 
Therefore, in this Ayah Allah commanded the believers to 
believe, and this command is not redundant since what is 
sought here is firmness and continuity of performing the deeds 


that help one remain on the path of faith. Also, Allah 
commanded His believing servants to proclaim, 


426i CA oy OS Gi Go GS 4 > 
<Our Lord! Let not our hearts deviate (from the truth) after 


You have guided us, and grant us mercy from You. Truly, 
You are the Bestower.> (3:8). Hence, 


42 Loot tuaip 


<Guide us to the straight way> means, “Make us firm on the path 
of guidance and do not allow us to deviate from it.” 


86 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
CEES ook yA 2 yk A any 
€7. The way of those upon whom You have bestowed Your 


grace, not (that) of those who earned Your anger, nor of those 
who went astray>. 


We mentioned the Hadith in which the servant proclaims, 
42 Lot tip 
<€Guide us to the straight way> and Allah says, “This is for My 
servant, and My servant shall acquire what he asks for.” Allah’s 
statement. 
tpg Saad Call Led 
<The way of those upon whom You have bestowed Your grace> 
defines the path. Those upon whom Allah has bestowed His 


grace’ are those mentioned in Surat An-Nisa’ (chapter 4), when 
Allah said, 
SHG Sm iaG Seni SG ple ck Gl SMG ag S245 at a 5 


€iv0 ae Sh SG oil A \ PAA 5 | " 85 Aish gre: fad $ soils 


¢ ID 


¢And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger (Muhammad 
#4), then they will be in the company of those on whom Allah 
has bestowed His grace, the Prophets, the Siddigin (the truly 
faithful), the martyrs, and the righteous. And how excellent 
these companions are! Such is the bounty from Allah, and Allah 
is sufficient to know} (4:69-70). 
Allah’s statement, 


CHI 6h dS J8 
<Not (the way) of those who earned Your anger, nor of those 
who went astray > 


meaning guide us to the straight path, the path of those upon 
whom you have bestowed Your grace, that is, the people of 
guidance, sincerity and obedience to Allah and His 
Messengers. They are the people who adhere to Allah’s 
commandments and refrain from committing what He has 
prohibited. But, help us to avoid the path of those whom Allah 
is angry with, whose intentions are corrupt, who know the 
truth, yet deviate from it. Also, help us avoid the path of those 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 87 


who were led astray, who lost the true knowledge and, as a 
result, are wandering in misguidance, unable to find the 
correct path. Allah asserted that the two paths He described 
here are both misguided when He repeated the negation ‘not’. 
These two paths are the paths of the Christians and Jews, a 
fact that the believer should beware of so that he avoids them. 
The path of the believers is knowledge of the truth and abiding 
by it. In comparison, the Jews abandoned practicing the 
religion, while the Christians lost the true knowledge. This is 
why ‘anger’ descended upon the Jews, while being described 
as ‘led astray’ is more appropriate of the Christians. Those 
who know, but avoid implementing the truth, deserve the 
anger, unlike those who are ignorant. The Christians want to 
seek the true knowledge, but are unable to find it because 
they did not seek it from its proper resources. This is why 
they were led astray. We should also mention that both the 
Christians and the Jews have earned the anger and are led 
astray, but the anger is one of the attributes more particular 
of the Jews. Allah said about the Jews, 


hae ks OS > 
<Those (Jews) who incurred the curse of Allah and His wrath> 
(5:60). 


The attribute that the Christians deserve most is that of 
being led astray, just as Allah said about them, 


2 wee 2 of -4ic 24 fr bes 4 yet 
Kc Tye 2 Ss he WSN LS oe I 15> 


«Who went astray before and who misled many, and strayed 
(themselves) from the right path> (5:77). 


There are several Hadiths and reports from the Salaf on this 
subject. Imam Ahmad recorded that ‘Adi bin Hatim said, “The 
horsemen of the Messenger of Allah # seized my paternal aunt 
and some other people. When they brought them to the 
Messenger of Allah #, they were made to stand in line before 
him. My aunt said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! The supporter is far 
away, the offspring have stopped coming and I am an old 
woman, unable to serve. Grant me your favor, may Allah grant 
you His favor.’ He said, ‘Who is your supporter?’ She said, ‘Adi 
bin Hatim.’ He said, The one who ran away from Allah and His 
Messenger?’ She said, ‘So, the Prophet # freed me.’ When the 


88 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Prophet 3% came back, there was a man next to him, I think 
that he was ‘Ali, who said to her, ‘Ask him for a means of 
transportation.’ She asked the Prophet #%, and he ordered that 
she be given an animal.” ‘Adi then said, “Later on, she came to 
me and said, ‘He (Muhammad 2s) has done a favor that your 
father (who was a generous man) would never have done. So 
and-so person came to him and he granted him his favor, and 
so-and-so came to him and he granted him his favor.’ So I went 
to the Prophet #% and found that some women and children 
were gathering with him, so close that I knew that he was not a 
king like Kisra (King of Persia) or Caesar. He said, ‘O ‘Adi! What 
made you run away, so that La ilaha illaliah is not proclaimed? 
Is there a deity worthy of worship except Allah? What made you 
run away, so that Allahu Akbar (Allah is the Greater) is not 
proclaimed? Is there anything Greater than Allah?’ I proclaimed 
my Islam and I saw his face radiate with pleasure and he said: 


a sila JUN Sy 5 Sad pyle O,abch Sp 


‘Those who have earned the anger are the Jews and those who 
are led astray are the Christians.»” 


This Hadith was also collected by At-Tirmidhi who said that 
it is Hasan Gharib"! 


Also, when Zayd bin ‘Amr bin Nufayl went with some of his 
friends - before Islam - to Ash-Sham seeking the true religion, 
the Jews said to him, “You will not become a Jew unless you 
carry a share of the anger of Allah that we have earned.” He 
said, “I am seeking to escape Allah’s anger.” Also, the 
Christians said to him, “If you become one of us you will carry 
a share in Allah’s discontent.” He said, “I cannot bear it.” So 
he remained in his pure nature and avoided worshipping the 
idols and the polytheistic practices. He became neither a Jew, 
nor Christian. As for his companions, they became Christians 
because they found it more pure than Judaism. Waraqah bin 
Nawfal was among these people until Allah guided him by the 
hand of His Prophet #, when he was sent as Prophet, and 
Waraqah believed in the revelation that was sent to the Prophet 
# may Allah be pleased with him. 


(1) Ahmad 4:378, and Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8:289. 


Stirah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 89 


The Summary of Al-Fatihah 


The honorable Surah Al-Fatihah contains seven Aydt 
including the praise and thanks of Allah, glorifying Him and 
praising Him by mentioning His most Beautiful Names and 
most high Attributes. It also mentions the Hereafter, which is 
the Day of Resurrection, and directs Allah’s servants to ask of 
Him, invoking Him and declaring that all power and strength 
comes from Him. It also calls to the sincerity of the worship of 
Allah alone, singling Him out in His divinity, believing in His 
perfection, being free from the need o uny partners, having no 
rivals nor equals. Al-Fatihah directs the believers to invoke 
Allah to guide them to the straight path, which is the true 
religion, and to help them remain on that path in this life, and 
to pass over the actual Sirdt (bridge over hell that everyone 
must pass over} on the Day of Judgment. On that Day, the 
believers will be directed to the gardens of comfort in the 
company of the Prophets, the truthful ones, the martyrs and 
the righteous. Al-Fdtihah also encourages performing good 
deeds, so that the believers will be in the company of the 
good-doers on the Day of Resurrection. The Stirah also warns 
against following the paths of misguidance, so that one does 
not end up being gathered with those who indulge in sin, on 
the Day of Resurrection, including those who have earned the 
anger and those who were led astray. 


The Bounties are because of Allah, not the Deviations 
Allah said, 


(pb CD Call Ud 


<The way of those upon whom you have bestowed Your grace>, when 
He mentioned His favor. On mentioning anger, Allah said, 


trek yy Zep 
<Not (that) of those who earned Your anger>, without mentioning 
the subject, although it is He Who has sent down the anger on 
them, just as Allah stated in another Ayah, 
pie al Ck OF call Lh F lp 
Have you (O Muhammad 2%) not seen those (hypocrites) who 
take as friends a people upon whom is the wrath of Allah (i.e. 


90 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Jews)?> (58:14). 

Also, Allah relates the misguidance of those who indulged in 
it, although they were justly misguided according to Allah’s 
appointed destiny. For instance, Allah said, 

453 5 58 oh Le 5 ET ob ae o> 
¢He whom Allah guides, he is the rightly-guided ; but he whom 
He sends astray, for him you will find no Wali (guiding friend) 
to lead him (to the right path)» (18:17) 


and, 
CIGAR yl bE A Gib IS HI we > 


<Whomsoever Allah sends astray, none can guide him; and He 
lets them wander blindly in their transgression} (7:186). 


These and several other Aydt testify to the fact that Allah 
alone is the One Who guides and misguides, contrary to the 
belief of the Qadariyyah sect, who claimed that the servants 
choose and create their own destiny. They rely on some 
unclear Aydt avoiding what is clear and contradicts their 
desires. Theirs, is the method of the people who follow their 
lust, desire and wickedness. An authentic Hadith narrated, 


oo oto me oe ca ed oli 2 we BLE rote 4 
Cbg de UG al om Cdl ay ae Gls be Oya Gl al) [3]? 


tWhen you see those who follow what is not so clear in it (the 
Qur'an), then they are those whom Allah has mentioned (refer 
to 3:7). Hence, avoid them.» 


The Prophet # was referring to Allah’s statement, 
Ciaals Kiely Ladi Tesh 2, OH 0 AKG BS iy sh 3 Slt COD 


€So as for those in whose hearts there is a deviation (from the 
truth) they follow that which is not entirely clear thereof, 
seeking Al-Fitnah (polytheism and trials), and seeking for its 
hidden meanings>(3:7). 

Verily, no innovator in the religion could ever rely on any 
authentic evidence in the Qur’an that testifies to his 
innovation. The Qur’an came to distinguish between truth and 
falsehood, and guidance and misguidance. The Qur’an does 


01) Fath Al-Bari 8:57. 


Surah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 91 


not contain any discrepancies or contradictions, because it is 
a revelation from the Most Wise, Worthy of all praise. 


Saying Amin 

It is recommended to say Amin after finishing the recitation 
of Al-Fatihah. Amin means, “O Allah! Accept our invocation.” 
The evidence that saying Amin is recommended is contained in 
what Imams Ahmad, Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi recorded, 
that Wa’il bin Hujr said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah 2% 
recite, 


reales] Yy egie yall pep 
<Not (that) of those who earned Your anger, nor of those who 
went astray>, and he said ‘Amin’ extending it with his 
voice,”44 

Abu Dawud’s narration added, “Raising his voice with it.” At- 
Tirmidhi then commented that this Hadith is Hasan and was 
also narrated from ‘Ali and Ibn Mas‘ad!2! . Also, Abu Hurayrah 
narrated that whenever the Messenger of Allah # would recite, 

CAI Y, gk LE Zep 
<Not (the way) of those who earned Your anger, nor of those who 
went astray>, He would say Amin until those who were behind 
him in the first line could hear him.!*! 

Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah recorded this Hadith with the 
addition, “Then the Masjid would shake because of (those 
behind the Prophet #4) reciting Amin.”*! Also, Ad-Daraqutni 
recorded this Hadith and commented that it is Hasan. Further, 
Bilal narrated that he said, “O Messenger of Allah! Do not finish 
saying Amin before I can join you.”5! This was recorded by Abu 
Dawud.!6l 

In addition, Abu Nasr Al-Qushayri narrated that Al-Hasan 
and Ja‘far As-Sadiq stressed the ‘m’ in Amin. 


(1) Ahmad 4:315, Abu Dawud 1:574, Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 2:67. 
21 Tyhfat ALAhwadhi 2:67. 

(3) Abu Dawud 1:575. 

41 Abu Dawud 1:575, Ibn Majah 1:279. 

IS! Ad-Daraqutni 1 :335 

(61 Abu Dawud 1:576. 


92 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Saying Amin is recommended for those who are not praying 
(when reciting Al-Fatihah) and is strongly recommended for 
those who are praying, whether alone or behind the Imam. 
The Two Sahihs recorded that the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 


cal oye p88 GS yak Koch Golk CE Sing GOB ABE pay of op 
«When the Imam says, ' Amin’, then say, ‘Amin’, because 
whoever says, Amin’ with the angels, his previous sins will be 
forgiven 0" 
Muslim recorded that the Messenger of Allah 2g said, 


SIG Sal GEN 3 BI Gal ple Be Sich JG bp 
uy As US 6 AW huey 


tWhen any of you says in the prayer, ‘Amin ‘ and the angels 
in heaven say, ‘Amin’, in unison, his previous sins will be 
forgiven .0!?1 
It was said that the Hadith talks about both the angels and the 
Muslims saying Amin at the same time. The Hadith also refers to 
when the Amins said by the angels and the Muslims are equally 
sincere (thus bringing about forgiveness). Further, it is recorded in 
Sahih Muslim that Abu Misa related to the Prophet #5 that he 
said, 


Ch) Soa ot i tJ 35 3 dua V5 :- FEY! os - Ju BY 


‘When the Imam says, ‘Walad-dallin’, say, ‘Amin’ and Allah 
will answer your invocation .1'*! 


In addition, At-Tirmidhi said that ‘Amin’ means, “Do not 
disappoint our hope”, while the majority of scholars said that 
it means. “Answer our invocation.” 

Also, in his Musnad, Imam Ahmad recorded that ‘A’ishah 
said that when the Jews were mentioned to him, the 
Messenger of Allah 3 said, 


Oo 


He aot T- i Ao 
1135 Wl & ai Gis 2h aes ie CAG US oat 3 le hens S ob 
tpl : play cas Oss Je we Ly gl in Gas oN alta ley ge 
(1 Fath Al-Bari 11:203 and Muslim 1 :307. 


[2) Muslim 1:307. 
13) Muslim 1:303. 


Surah 1. Al-Fatihah (Part-1) 93 


‘They will not envy us for anything more than they envy us 
for Friday which we have been guided to, while they were led 


astray from it, and for the Qiblah which we were guided to, 
while they were led astray from it, and for our saying ‘Amin’ 
behind the Imam .»!"| 

Also, Ibn Majah recorded this Hadith with the wording, 


coals pO Je Sins & od fe 5 gh Sas un 
‘The Jews have never envied you more than for youk saying the 
Salam (Islamic greeting) and for saying Amin .»!? 


( Ahmad 6:134 
[21 Ibn Majah 2 :278. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 95 


Tafsir of Sdrat Al-Baqarah 
(Chapter 2) 


Which was revealed in Al-Madinah 


The Virtues of 
— SEeaaz] | Sarat Al-Baqarah 
cS Ex BRIS Re In Musnad Ahmad, 


Sahih Muslim, At- 
Tirmidhi and An- 
A. She ce Nasa'i, it is recorded 
Sl _ I sly that Abu Hurayrah 


LR See oe gr yee ee -< said that the Prophet 


Sy 4 Pr cae Tao Cie air ye oo Seat ay 
idl Ones Cll Oud all © oat | bp 5,5 68 las ve 
24 
dpi 


bE lb @ Gel CGE] He 8 18 gah ch 

5 i pte Be gees as alee eV ral 
@ a pe BAY a oo WE ay nag ee 
oo a ree ‘Do not turn your 
AS) gn of Sas ke houses into graves. Ve- 
Gin 7D \t3te Od rily, Shaytén does not 
uprlaall é se the. house where 
Strat Al-Bagarah is 
recited.» — At-Tirmidhi 
said, “Hasan Sahih") 

Also, ‘Abdullah bin 
Mas‘tid said, 
“Shaytan flees from 
the house where 
Surat Al-Baqarah is 
heard.” This Hadith was collected by An-Nasa'i in Al-Yawm 
wal-Layiah,'* and Al-Hakim recorded it in his Mustadrak, and 
then said that its chain of narration is authentic, although the 


(1) Ahmad 2 :284, Muslim 1:539, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8:180, An-Nasa7i 
in Al-Kubra 5:13. 


7] An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubra 5:13. 


9% Tafsir Ton Kathir 
Two Sahihs did not collect it.!'! In his Musnad, Ad-Darimi 
recorded that Ibn Mas‘ad said, “Shaytadn departs the house 
where Strat Al-Bagarah is being recited, and as he leaves, he 
passes gas.” Ad-Darimi also recorded that Ash-Sha‘bi said that 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘td said, “Whoever recites ten Aydt from 
Sdrat Al-Baqarah in a night, then Shaytan will not enter his 
house that night. (These ten Aydt are) four from the beginning, 
Aydt Al-Kursi (255), the following two Aydt (256-257) and the 
last three Aydt.” In another narration, Ibn Mas‘td said, “Then 
Shaytdn will not come near him or his family, nor will he be 
touched by anything that he dislikes. Also, if these Aydt were 
to OF recited over a senile person, they would wake him 
up.’ 
Further, Sahl bin Sa‘d said that the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 


J os 3 ule ys Sy dh ted pee by ues 6k 8 bp 
eel So Sth WEG Ie ot IS ty gid So Sth HE 


«Everything has a hump (or, high peek), and Al-Bagarah is the 
high peek of the Qur'an. Whoever recites Al-Bagarah at night in 
his house, then Shaytén will not enter that house for three 
nights. Whoever recites it during a day in his house, then 
Shaytan will not enter that house for three days.» 


This Hadith was collected by Abu Al-Qasim At-Tabarani, Abu 
Hatim Ibn Hibban in his Sahih and Ibn Marduwyah.'! 

At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasai and Ibn Majah recorded that Abu 
Hurayrah said, “The Messenger of Allah sent an expedition 
force comprising of many men and asked each about what 
they memorized of the Qur’dn. The Prophet # came to one of 
the youngest men among them and asked him, ‘What have you 
memorized (of the Qur’4n) young man?’ He said, I memorized 
such and such Surahs and also Al-Bagarah.’ The Prophet 
said, ‘You memorized Surat Al-Baqarah?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ The, 
Prophet # said, Then you are their commander.’ One of the 
noted men (or chiefs) commented, By Allah! I did not learn 
Surat Al-Baqarah, for fear that I would not be able to 


D1) Al-Hakim 2:260. 
[21 Ad-Darimi 2 :322. 
13! At-Tabarani 6:163 and Ibn Hibban 2:78. 


Siirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1 97 
implement it. The Messenger of Allah # said, 
whe JES 4 05 18 chs 35 ote Ge OG Cats Shar Liha 
SS 3e BBS BBE & fos i BB hy Ob Re Hv 
Welw Ode opal al 
«Learn Al-Qur’an and recite it, for the example of whoever 
learns the Qur’an, recites it and adheres to it, is the example of 
a bag that is full of musk whose scent fills the air. The example 
of whoever learns the Qur'an and then sleeps (i.e. lazy) while 


the Qur'an is in his memory, is the example of a bag that has 
musk, but is closed tight.» 


This is the wording collected by At-Tirmidhi, who said that 
this Hadith is Hasan. In another narration, At-Tirmidhi 
recorded this same Hadith in a Mursal manner, so Allah 
knows best.!?! 

Also, Al-Bukhari recorded that Usayd bin Hudayr said that 
he was once reciting Surat Al-Baqarah while his horse was tied 
next to him. The horse started to make some noise. When 
Usayd stopped reciting, the horse stopped moving about. 
When he resumed reading, the horse started moving about 
again. When he stopped reciting, the horse stopped moving, 
and when he resumed reading, the horse started to move 
again. Meanwhile, his son Yahya was close to the horse, and 
he feared that the horse might step on him. When he moved 
his son back, he looked up to the sky and saw a cloud 
radiating with light that looked like lamps. In the morning, he 
went to the Prophet #¢ and told him what had happened and 
then said, “O Messenger of Allah! My son Yahya was close to 
the horse and I feared that she might step on him. When I 
attended to him and raised my head to the sky, I saw a cloud 
with lights like lamps. So I went, but I couldn’t see it.” The 
Prophet # said, “Do you know what that was?” He said, “No.” 
The Prophet # said, 


ENS Y tel U0 5h Cad ONG 4h Gyo) 2 Kp Hip 
«ae 
Wa ac) 


(1 Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8:186, An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubrad 5:227, and Ibn 
Majah 1:78. 


98 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


‘They were the angels, they came close hearing your voice 
(reciting Sitrat Al-Bagarah), and if you had kept reading, the 
people would have been able to see the angels when the morning 
came, and the angels would not be hidden from their eyes.s!"! 


This is the narration reported by Imam Abu Ubayd Al-Qasim 
bin Sala4m in his book Fadd’il Al-Qur’an. 


Virtues of Sarat Al-Bagarah and Sirat Al ‘Imran 


Imam Ahmad said that Abu Nu‘aym narrated to them that 
Bishr bin Muhajir said that ‘Abdullah bin Buraydah narrated 
to him from his father, “I was sitting with the Prophet # and I 
heard him say, 


Mb Gabe VG ipos WSs ey WEEE Sp eth gy 1th 


‘Learn Strat Al-Bagarah, because in learning it there is 
blessing, in ignoring it there is sorrow, and the sorceresses 
cannot memorize it.» 


He #8 kept silent for a while and then said, 

GN Fy Keele OU OIA LEE dite diy gdh G4 1c 
65 Sele Ab SIAN Oy G52 2b ty ob af ote Gf gene KEE 
GJ 8 fe 0 dus ob ee 5 ce Sis ge cual 
SiS Sy nigh go GBT cal Sth Gb ai af 
Bia his sts IB 259 be @sdl Oly pts od eb JS Oy 
et VG 21g B85 Ugh CU Ue a de Sy 
esti 3f Sw ds LE gis uke 58 Bs Sah 055g deoy LG 
‘Learn Stirat Al-Bagarah and Al ‘Imran because they are two 
lights and they shade their people on the Day of Resurrection, 
just as two clouds, two spaces of shade or two lines of (flying) 
birds. The Qur'an will meet its companion in the shape of a 
pale-faced man on the Day of Resurrection when his grave is 


opened. The Qur'an will ask him, "Do you know me?’ The man 
will say, ‘I do not know you.’ The Qur’an will say, ‘I am your 


(I Fath Al-Bari 8 :680 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 


companion, the Qur'an, which has brought you thirst during 
the heat and made you stay up during the night. Every 
merchant has his certain trade. But, this Day, you are behind 
all types of trade.’ Kingship will then be given to him in his 
right hand, eternal life in his left hand and the crown of grace 
will be placed on his head. His parents will also be granted two 
garments that the people of this life could never afford. They 
will say, ‘Why were we granted these garments?’ It will be 
said, ‘Because your son was carrying the Qur’an.’ It will be 
said (to the reader of the Qur'an), ‘Read and ascend through the 
levels of Paradise.’ He will go on ascending as long as he 
recites, whether reciting slowly or quickly 0”) 


Ibn Majah also recorded part of this Hadith from Bishr bin 
Al-Muhajir,'?! and this chain of narrators is Hasan, according 
to the criteria of Imam Muslim. 

A part of this Hadith is also supported by other Hadiths. For 
instance, Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu ‘Umamah Al-Bahili 
said that he heard the Messenger of Allah #% say, 


Site dig Sah gasp tg weal ee BY BEE Sp Sips iin 
ie obs LEE 3 owes UES Gi gud KEE Bul gy oul KEE 

seat 635 Gglil 42 QUE Ste gb 
‘Read the Qur'an, because it will intercede on behalf of its 
people on the Day of Resurrection. Read the two lights, Al- 
Bagarah and Al ‘Imran, because they will come in the shape of 
fwo clouds, two shades or two lines of birds on the Day of 


Resurrection and will argue on behalf of their people on that 
Day.» 


The Prophet # then said, 
edibh Yrbiss Vg ies YS By WALL Sg zhi si 


«Read Al-Bagarah, because in having it there is blessing, and 
in ignoring there is a sorrow and the sorceresses cannot 
memorize it .0!°I 


i] Ahmad 5 :352 
[21 fbn Majah 2:1242. 
13] Ahmad 5 :249 


100 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Also, Imam Muslim narrated this Hadith in the Book of 
Prayer!!! 

Imam Ahmad narrated that An-Nawwas bin Sam‘an said 
that the Prophet # said, 


Jy at 52 ad gy Sls oe ah ashy seal gy otbL yp 
Olja 
«On the Day of Resurrection the Qur'an and its people who 


used to implement it will be brought forth, preceded by Strat 
Al-Bagarah and Al ‘Imran 0 


An-Nawwas said, “The Prophet 3% set three examples for 
these two Strahs and I did not forget these examples ever 
since. He 3% said, 

Po & obs Gale oh 338 Wes 96s oul Gf om Eee 

tligele $2 VEL Sipe 
‘They will come like two clouds, two dark shades or two lines 
of birds arguing on behalf of their people .»'?) 


It was also recorded in Sahih Muslim'3! and At-Tirmidhi 
narrated this Hadith, which he rendered Hasan Gharib.|*1 


Sdarat Al-Baqgarah was revealed in Al-Madinah 
There is no disagreement over the view that Surat Al- 
Baqarah was revealed in its entirety in Al-Madinah. Moreover, 


Al-Bagarah was one of the first Stirahs to be revealed in Al- 
Madinah, while, Allah’s statement, 


C51 Bh 8 SAS U5 SGD 
¢And be afraid of the Day when you shall be brought back to 
Allah.) (2:281) 
was the last Ayah to be revealed from the Qur'an. Also, the 


Aydt about usury were among the last Aydt to be revealed. 
Khalid bin Ma‘dan used to call Al-Bagarah the Fustat (tent) of 


1 Muslim 1:553 

21 Ahmad 4:183 

3) Muslim 1:554. 

4) Tyhfat ALAhwadhi 8:191 


Strah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1 101 


the Qur’én. Some of the scholars said that it contains a 
thousand news incidents, a thousand commands and a 
thousand prohibitions. Those who count said that the number 
of Al-Bagarah’s Aydt is two hundred and eighty-seven, and its 
words are six thousand two hundred and twenty-one words. 
Further, its letters are twenty-five thousand five hundred. 
Allah knows best. 

Ibn Jurayj narrated that ‘Ata’ said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
“Strat Al-Baqarah was revealed in Al-Madinah.”") Also, Khasif 
said from Mujahid that ‘Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr said; “Surat 
Al-Bagarah was revealed in Al-Madinah.”! Several Imams and 
scholars of Tafsir issued similar statements, and there is no 
difference of opinion over this as we have stated. 

The Two Sahihs recorded that Ibn Mas‘id kept the Ka‘bah 
on his left side and Mina on his right side and threw seven 
pebbles (at the Jamrah) and said, “The one to whom Surat Al 
Bagqarah was revealed (i.e. the Prophet 3%) performed Rami (the 
Hay rite of throwing pebbles) similarly.” The Two Sahihs 
recorded this Hadith.!°! 

Further, Ibn Marduwyah reported a Hadith of Shu‘bah from 
‘Aqil bin Talhah from Utbah bin Marthad; “The Prophet saw 
that his Companions were not in the first lines and he said, 


52d 5% Clas! yp 


tO Companions of Strat Al-Bagarah.. | Think that this incident 
occurred during the battle of Hunayn when the Companions 
retreated. Then, the Prophet #% commanded Al-‘Abbas (his 
uncle) to yell out, 


read a ra ua 


‘O Companions of the tree!’ meaning the Companions who 
participated in the pledge of Ar-Ridwan (under the tree). In 
another narration, Al- ‘Abbas cried, “O Companions of Surat 
Al-Bagqarah\” encouraging them to come back, so they returned 
from every direction. Also, during the battle of Al-Yamamah, 
against the army of Musaylimah the Liar, the Companions 


QV Ad-Durr Al-Manthur 1:47. 
2) hid. 
3] Fath Al-Bari 3:678, Muslim 2:942. 


102 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


first retreated because of the huge number of soldiers in 
Musaylimah’s army. The Muhajirin and the Ansar called out 
for each other, saying; “O people of Surat Al-Bagarah\” Allah 
then gave them victory over their enemy, may Allah be pleased 
with all of the companions of all the Messengers of Allah.!"! 


4s_i _ Si af ~ > 
ih) Sip 
€In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful 
<1. Alif Lam Mim. 


The Discussion of the Individual Letters 


The individual letters in the beginning of some Sdrahs are 
among those things whose knowledge Allah has kept only for 
Himself. This was reported from Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, 
‘Ali and Ibn Mas‘dd. It was said that these letters are the 
names of some of the Sirahs. It was also said that they are 
the beginnings that Allah chose to start the Surahs of the 
Qur’an with. Khasif stated that Mujahid said, “The beginnings 
of the Stirahs, such as Qaf, Sad, Ta Sin Mim and Alif Lam Ra, 
are just some letters of the alphabet.” Some linguists also 
stated that they are letters of the alphabet and that Allah 
simply did not cite the entire alphabet of twenty-eight letters. 
For instance, they said, one might say, “My son recites Alif, 
Ba, Ta, Tha... ” he means the entire alphabet although he 
stops before mentioning the rest of it. This opinion was 
mentioned by Ibn Jarir.'?! 


The Letters at the Beginning of Sirahs 

If one removes the repetitive letters, then the number of letters 
mentioned at the beginning of the Sdrahs is fourteen: Alif, Lam, 
Mim, Sad, Ra, Kaf, Ha, Ya, ‘Ayn, Ta, Sin, Ha, Qaf, Nun. 

So glorious is He Who made everything subtly reflect His 
wisdom. 

Moreover, the scholars said, “There is no doubt that Allah 
did not reveal these letters for jest and play.” Some ignorant 


[1 ALMajma‘ 6 :180. 
2) At-Tabari 1:208. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagqarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 103 


people said that some of the Qur'an does not mean anything, 
(meaning, such as these letters) thus committing a major 
mistake. On the contrary, these letters carry a specific 
meaning. Further, if we find an authentic narration leading to 
the Prophet 3% that explains these letters, we will embrace the 
Prophet’s statement. Otherwise, we will stop where we were 
made to stop and will proclaim, 


415 we 35 Ky cd 
We believe in it; all of it (clear and unclear verses) is from our 
Lord> (3:7). 
The scholars did not agree on one opinion or explanation 
regarding this subject. Therefore, whoever thinks that one 
scholar’s opinion is correct, he is obliged to follow it, otherwise 


it is better to refrain from making any judgment on this 
matter. Allah knows best. 


These Letters testify to the Miraculous Qur’an 


The wisdom behind mentioning these letters in the beginning 
of the Surahs, regardless of the exact meanings of these 
letters, is that they testify to the miracle of the Qur’an. Indeed, 
the servants are unable to produce something like the Qur’an, 
although it is comprised of the same letters with which they 
speak to each other. This opinion was mentioned by Ar-R4azi in 
his Tafsir who related it to Al-Mubarrid and several other 
scholars. Al-Qurtubi also related this opinion to Al-Farra’ and 
Qutrub. Az-Zamakhshari agreed with this opinion in his 
book, Al-Kashshdf. In addition, the Imam and scholar Abu Al- 
‘Abbas Ibn Taymiyyah and our Shaykh Al-Hafiz Abu Al-Hajjaj 
Al-Mizzi agreed with this opinion. Al-Mizzi told me that it is 
also the opinion of Shaykh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah. 

Az-Zamakhshari said that these letters, “Were not all 
mentioned once in the beginning of the Qur’an. Rather, they 
were repeated so that the challenge (against the creation) is 
more daring. Similarly, several stories were mentioned 
repeatedly in the Qur’an, and also the challenge was repeated 
in various areas (i.e., to produce something like the Qur'an). 
Sometimes, one letter at a time was mentioned, such as Sad, 
Nin and Qaf. Sometimes two letters were mentioned, such as 


42> 


104 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<Ha Mim) (44:1) Sometimes, three letters were mentioned, 
such as, 


cep 
<Alif Lam Mim (2 :1)} and four letters, such as, 
ip 
¢‘Alif Lim Mim Ra> (13:1), and 
SL aap 
€Alif Lam Mim Sad} (7:1). 
Sometimes, five letters were mentioned, such as, 


A Sano 
<Kaf Ha Ya ‘Ayn Sad> (19:1), and; 
€Ee aap 

¢Ha Mim. ‘Ayn Sin Qafp (42:1-2). 

This is because the words that are used in speech are 
usually comprised of one, two, three, four, or five letters.” 

Every Surah that begins with these letters demonstrates the 
Qur’an’s miracle and magnificence, and this fact is known by 


those well-versed in such matters. The count of these Strahs 
is twenty-nine. For instance, Allah said, 


43 BV ESI BS ep 
<Alif Lam Mim> This is the Book (the Qur’an), wherein 
there is no doubt (2:1-2), 


CEOS Hh si ae Bes ot AV Sop 
€Alif Lam Mim. Allah! La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right 
to be worshipped but He), Al-Hayyul-Qayyuum (the Ever 
Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists). It is 
He Who has sent down the Book (the Qur'an) to you 
(Muhammad 3%) with truth, confirming what came before it.> 
(3:1-3), and, 


M5 UE Lis 3g KK HUY ts HD 
<Alif Lam Mim Sad. (This is the) Book (the Qur’an) sent down 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1 105 


unto you (O Muhammad #2), so let not your breast be narrow 
therefrom) (7:1-2). 
Also, Allah said, 

42455 ok, ool J cll S Gal GA Sh SH Ste Sp 
¢Alif Lam Ra. (This is) a Book which We have revealed unto 
you (O Muhammad 3%) in order that you might lead mankind 
out of darkness (of disbelief and polytheism) into the light (of 


belief in the Oneness of Allah and Islamic Monotheism) by their 
Lord’s leave> (14:1), 


CEOS SD op 18 bY teal dg a> 
¢Alif Lam Mim. The revelation of the Book (this Qur'an) in 


which there is no doubt, is from the Lord of the ‘Alamin 
(mankind, Jinn and all that exists)!} (32:1-2), 


Ciel SG dw cep 
4Ha Mim. A revelation from (Allah) the Most Gracious, the 
Most Merciful} (41:1-2), and, 
4201S Soi Si OS o SB SG a pg BE ge > 
¢Ha Mim. ‘Ain Sin Qaf. Likewise Allah, the Almighty, the 


Wise sends revelation to you (O Muhammad #:) as (He sent 
revelation to) those before you.» (42:1-3). 
There are several other Aydt that testify to what we have 
mentioned above, and Allah knows best. 
Lath 68 43 SY CEST easy 
€2. That is Book in which there is no Rayb, guidance for the 
Muttaqin>. 


There is no Doubt in the Qur’an 


The Book, is the Qur’an, and Rayb means doubt. As-Suddi 
said that Abu Malik and Abu Salih narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas, 
and Murrah Al-Hamadani narrated from Ibn Mas‘id and 
several other Companions of the Messenger of Allah 3 that, 


443 25 Vp 


€In which there is no Rayb>, means about which there is no 


106 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


doubt.!) Abu Ad-Darda’, Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, Said bin 
Jubayr, Abu Malik, Nafi‘ ‘Ata’, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas, Muqatil bin Hayyan, As-Suddi, Qatadah and Isma‘l bin 
Abi Khalid said similarly. In addition, Ibn Abi Hatim said, “I do 
not know of any disagreement over this explanation.”7! The 
meaning of this is that the Book, the Qur’an, is without a 
doubt revealed from Allah. Similarly, Allah said in Sdrat As- 
Sajdah, 


Mine arse ot Ce Fw A ote 
ft So on 48 Gy VY Sell is A STip 


pet 


¢Alif Lam Mim}. The revelation of the Book (this Qur’dn) in 
which there is no doubt, is from the Lord of all that exists> 
(32:1-2). 

Some scholars stated that this Ayah - 2:2 - contains a 
prohibition meaning, “Do not doubt the Qur’an.” Furthermore, 
some of the reciters of the Qur’4n pause upon reading, 


CY 
<there is no doubt? and they then continue; 
in which there is guidance for the Muttagin (the pious and righteous 
persons)». However, it is better to pause at, 


* 


€43 > 


¢in which there is no doubt» because in this case, 
siay 


<guidance> becomes an attribute of the Qur’an and carries a 
better meaning than, 


sib 43> 


€in which there is guidance>. 


Guidance is granted to Those Who have Taqwa 


Hiddyah - correct guidance - is only granted to those who 
have Taqwa - fear of Allah. Allah said, 


1] At-Tabari 1:228. 
7] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:31. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 107 
se ey as ae fee eee tae Zz, +s 

Sake Shy 85 pp a OLR Y Gall th i a ID 

- owes one ow ee Co, 

qn5 pos ot SG Hs) AS 


€Say : It is for those who believe, a guide and a healing. And as 
for those who disbelieve, there is heaviness (deafness) in their 
ears, and it (the Qur'an) is blindness for them. They are those 
who are called from a place far away (so they neither listen nor 
understand)> (41:44), and, 


0, 


CUE Yy Sl Sys od Sy Ue Bo il Sd 
And We send down of the Qur'an that which is a healing and 
a mercy to those who believe (in Islamic Monotheism and act on 
it), and it increases the Zalimin (wrongdoers) in nothing but 
loss> (17:82). 


This is a sample of the numerous Aydt indicating that the 
believers, in particular, benefit from the Qur’an. That is 
because the Qur'an is itself a form of guidance, but the 
guidance in it is only granted to the righteous, just as Allah 
said, 

i 6s hb 3 ths Ki og thes KEG BOK CED 

Cera 
<O mankind! There has come to you a good advice from your 
Lord (i.e. the Qur'an, enjoining all that is good and forbidding 
all that is evil), and a healing for that (disease of ignorance, 
doubt, hypocrisy and differences) which is in your breasts, — a 
guidance and a mercy (explaining lawful and unlawful things) 

for the believers (10:57). 


Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn Mas‘tid and other Companions of the 
Messenger of Allah #3 said, 


<a wa) 


guidance for the Muttagin (the pious and righteous persons}, 
means, a light for those who have Taqwa. 


The Meaning of Al-Muttaqin 
Ibn ‘Abbas said about, 
inal 6A) 


108 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢guidance for the Muttagin> that it means, “They are the 
believers who avoid Shirk with Allah and who work in His 
obedience.” Ibn ‘Abbas also said that Al-Muttagin means, “Those 
who fear Allah’s punishment, which would result if they 
abandoned the true guidance that they recognize and know. 
They also hope in Allah’s mercy by believing in what He 
revealed.” Further, Qatadah said that, 


isl 


¢Al-Muttagin>, are those whom Allah has described in His 
Statement; 


Gai Sofas Sail GU} onl 
<Who believe in the Ghayb and perform the Salah> (2:3), 
and the following Aydt. Ibn Jarir stated that the Ayah (2:2) 
includes all of these meanings that the scholars have 
mentioned, and this is the correct view. Also, At-Tirmidhi and 
Ibn Majah narrated that ‘Atiyah As-Sa‘di said that the 
Messenger of Allah 3 said, 
tg ke gE Vu fas Be 5th 5 5% of ch Us 

‘The servant will not acquire the status of the Muttagin until 

he abandons what is harmless out of fear of falling into that 

which is harmful"! At-Tirmidhi then said “Hasan 

Gharib.” 


There are Two Types of Hiddyah (Guidance) 


Huda here means the faith that resides in the heart, and 
only Allah is able to create it in the heart of the servants. 
Allah said, 

42a SF ae ¥ Ap 


<Verily, you (O Muhammad 2) guide not whom you like> 
(28:56), 


45k Bie Ap 
€Not upon you (Muhammad 38) is their guidance> (2:272), 


") Tubfat ALAhwadhi 7 :147, and Ibn Majah 2:1409. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1 109 


C8 56 IS HI ws 
qWhomsoever Allah sends astray, none can guide him> 
(7:186), and, 


fue Boe 4 ae 


452 4g LR 5 BB St ae od 
¢He whom Allah guides, he is the rightly guided; but he whom 


He sends astray, for him you will find no Wali (guiding friend) 
to lead him (to the right path)> (18:17). 


Huda also means to explain the truth, give direction and 
lead to it. Allah, the Exalted, said, 
doit pre I oad Giy> 
And verily, you (O Muhammad #8) are indeed guiding 


(mankind) to the straight path (i.e. Allah's religion of Islamic 
Monotheism)> (42:52), 


46 5 Bes 52 tp 
<You are only a warner, and to every people there is a guide> 
(13:7), and, 
lt 6 GN SEE HENS 3/3 Ch> 
¢And as for Thamud, We showed and made clear to them the 
path of truth (Islamic Monotheism) through Our Messenger 


(i.e. showed them the way of success), but they preferred 
blindness to guidance} (41:17). 


testifying to this meaning. 
Also, Allah said, 
4S geal 1555 
<And shown him the two ways (good and evil) .> (90:10) 


This is the view of the scholars who said that the two ways 
refer to the paths of righteousness and evil, which is also the 
correct explanation. And Allah knows best. 


Meaning of Taqwa 


The root meaning of Taqwa is to avoid what one dislikes. It 
was reported that ‘Umar bin Al-Khattaéb asked Ubayy bin Ka‘b 
about Taqwa. Ubayy said, “Have you ever walked on a path 


110 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


that has thorns on it?” ‘Umar said, “Yes.” Ubayy said, “What 
did you do then?” He said, “I rolled up my sleeves and 
struggled.” Ubayy said, “That is Taqwa.” 


tah GB eallp 
€3.Those Who have faith in the Ghaybp. 


The Meaning of Iman 


Abu Ja‘far Ar-Razi said that Al-‘Ala’ bin Al-Musayyib bin 
Rafi‘ narrated from Abu Ishaq that Abu Al-Ahwas said that 
‘Abdullah said, “Iman is to trust.”.!] ‘Ali bin Abi Talhah 
reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 

SS 
¢who have faith> means they trust.!?] Also, Ma‘mar said that Az- 
Zuhri said, “Iman is the deeds.”*! In addition, Abu Ja‘far Ar- 
Razi said that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said that, They have faith’, 
means, they fear (Allah).!4) 

Ibn Jarir (At-Tabari) commented, “The prefered view is that 
they be described as having faith in the Unseen by the tongue, 
deed and creed. In this case, fear of Allah is included in the 
general meaning of Iman, which necessitates following deeds of 
the tongue by implementation. Hence, /mdn is a general term 
that includes affirming and believing in Allah, His Books and 
His Messengers, and realizing this affirmation through adhering 
to the implications of what the tongue utters and affirms.” 

Linguistically, in the absolute sense, Iman merely means 
trust, and it is used to mean that sometimes in the Qur’an, 
for instance, Allah the Exalted said, 


¢He trusts (yu’minu) in Allah, and trusts (yu'minu) in the 
believers.» (9:61) 
Prophet Yusuf’s brothers said to their father, 


Ul At-Tabari 1:235. 
21 Ibid. 
(31 Ibid. 
(41 Ibid. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 111 
tiie Cee HG yt I Sp 
<€But you will never believe us even when we speak the truth> 
(12:17). 


Further, the word Imdn is sometimes mentioned along with 
deeds, such as Allah said, 


tose hes Gor SS Ap 


4Save those who believe (in Islamic Monotheism) and do 
righteous deeds} (95:6). 


However, when [Iman is used in an unrestricted manner, it 
includes beliefs, deeds, and statements of the tongue.!"! We 
should state here that Iman increases and decreases. 

There are many narrations and Hadiths on this subject, and 
we discussed them in the beginning of our explanation of 
Sahih Al-Bukhari, all favors are from Allah. Some scholars 
explained that Iman means Khashyah (fear of Allah). For 
instance, Allah said; 


5h ois GE OOD 
<Verily, those who fear their Lord unseen (i.e. they do not see Him, 
nor His punishment in the Hereafter)> (67:12), and, 
Who feared the Most Gracious (Allah) in the Ghayb (unseen) 


and brought a heart turned in repentance (to Him and 
absolutely free from every kind of polytheism)> (50:33). 


Fear is the core of Iman and knowledge, just as Allah the 
Exalted said, 


iL ate int SE CD 
<It is only those who have knowledge among His servants that 
fear Allah (35:28). 


The Meaning of Al-Ghayb 


As for the meaning of Ghayb here, the Salaf have different 
explanations of it, all of which are correct, indicating the same 


11) See the Tafsir of Ibn Abi Hatim 1:35 


112 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


general meaning. For instance, Abu Ja‘far Ar-Razi quoted Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas, reporting from Abu Al-‘Aliyah about Allah’s 
statement, 


tosh > 
€(Those who) have faith in the Ghayby, 


“They believe in Allah, His angels, Books, Messengers, the Last 
Day, His Paradise, Fire and in the meeting with Him. They 
also believe in life after death and in Resurrection. All of this 
is the Ghayb.” Qatadah bin Di‘amah said similarly.!") 

Said bin Manstr reported from ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid 
who said, “We were sitting with ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad when we 
mentioned the Companions of the Prophet 2% and their deeds 
being superior to our deeds. ‘Abdullah said, The matter of 
Muhammad 2% was clear for those who saw him. By He other 
than Whom there is no God, no person will ever acquire a 
better type of faith than ppenevng i in gone. He then recited, 


4h SBE oil oat 68 ae Sh SIT as CS Sp 


€Alif Lam Min. This is the Book, wherein there is no doubt, a 

guidance for the Muttagin. Those who believe in the Ghayb>, 

until, 

diplitly 

€the successful}. *I21 Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Mar duwyah and Al- 
Hakim, in his Mustadrak,'*) recorded this Hadith. Al-Hakim 
commented that this Hadith is authentic and that the Two 
Shaykhs - Al-Bukhari and Muslim - did not collect it, although 
it meets their criteria. 

Ahmad recorded a Hadith with similar meaning from Ibn 
Muhayriz who said: I said to Abu Jumu‘ah, “Narrate a Hadith 
for us that you heard from the Messenger of Allah.” He said, 
“Yes. I will narrate a good Hadith for you. Once we had lunch 
with the Messenger of Allah #. Abu ‘Ubaydah, who was with 
us, said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Are people better than us? We 
embraced Islam with you and performed Jihdd with you.’ He 


(1 At-Tabari 1:236. 
21 Sad bin Mansur 2:544. 
'3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:34 and Al-Hakim 2 :260. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 113 
said, 
«Yes, those who will come after you, who will believe in me 
although they did not see me.0\'! 


This Hadith has another route collected by Abu Bakr bin 
Marduwyah in his Tafsir, from Salih bin Jubayr who said: 
‘Abu Jumu‘ah Al-Ans4ari, the Companion of the Messenger of 
Allah 3%, came to Bayt Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem) to perform the 
prayer. Raja’ bin Haywah was with us, so when Abu Jumu‘ah 
finished, we went out to greet him. When he was about to 
leave, he said, “You have a gift and a right. I will narrate a 
Hadith for you that I heard from the Messenger of Allah.” We 
said, “Do so, and may Allah grant you mercy.” He said, “We 
were with the Messenger of Allah, ten people including Mu‘adh 
bin Jabal. We said, "O Messenger of Allah! Are there people who 
will acquire greater rewards than us? We believed in Allah and 
followed you.’ He # said, 


CH ti Se Sly RIE 1S abl 5g at Jyt55 Ub Gy RR 
Re bh GbE as Splits 9 SUN od oo be SS pal Se 

toate Wal 
‘What prevents you from doing so, while the Messenger of 
Allah is among you, bringing you the revelation from heaven? 
There are people who will come after you and who will be given 
a book between two covers (the Qur'an), and they will believe 


in it and implement its commands. They have a greater reward 
than you, even twice as much »’"?\ 


BS oncece os de 


qs ED LL; ahi Oserins P 
¢And perform Salah, and spend out of what we have provided 
for them> 
Meaning of Iqamat As-Salah 
Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


(1) Ahmad 4:106. 
2] Ibn ‘Asakir 6 :368. 


114 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 


€IGI 55> 

¢And perform the Salah>, means, “Perform the prayer with all of 
the obligations that accompany it.”"! Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 
‘Abbas said, “Iqamat As-Salah means to complete the bowings, 
prostrations, recitation, humbleness and attendance for the 
prayer.”7] Qatadah said, “Iqamat As-Salah means to preserve 
punctuality, and the ablution, bowings, and prostrations of the 
prayer.”3! Mugatil bin Hayyan said Igamat As-Salah means "To 
preserve punctuality for it, as well as completing ones purity for 
it, and completing the bowings, prostrations, recitation of the 
Qur'an, Tashahhud and blessings for the Prophet 3%. This is 
Iqamat As-Salah.”") 


The Meaning of “Spending” in this Ayah 
‘Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
his ES > 
¢And spend out of what We have provided for them> means, “The 
Zakah due on their wealth.”5! As-Suddi said that Abu Malik 
and Abu Salih narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas, as well as Murrah 


from Ibn Mas‘id and other Companions of the Messenger of 
Allah 2, that, 


Da Sb oprerr 2 
‘ee we 


does rey (a> 

¢And spend out of what We have provided for them» means, “A 
man’s spending on his family. This was before the obligation of 
Zakah was revealed.”°! Juwaybir narrated from Ad-Dahhak, 
“General spending (in charity) was a means of drawing nearer 
to Allah, according to one’s discretion and capability. Until the 
obligation of charity was revealed in the seven Ayat of Surat 
Bara’ah (chapter 9), were revealed. These abrogated the 
previous case.”!7] 


(I At-Tabari 1:241. 

21 thid. 

31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:37. 
41 Ibid. 

IS) At-Tabari 1:243. 

6) Ihid. 

71 Ibid. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (1 - 24) (Part-1 115 


In many instances, Allah mentioned prayer and spending 
wealth together. Prayer is a right of Allah as well as a form of 
worshipping Him. It includes singling Him out for one’s 
devotion, praising Him, glorifying Him, supplicating to Him, 
invoking Him, and it displays one’s dependence upon Him. 
Spending is form of kindness towards creatures by giving them 
what will benefit them, and those people most deserving of 
this charity are the relatives, the wife, the servants and then 
the rest of the people. So all types of required charity and 
required spending are included in Allah’s saying, 


hii, ES LLG> 
¢And spend out of what we have provided for them>. The Two 


Sahihs recorded that Ibn ‘Umar said that the Messenger of 
Allah 2 said, 


ely ait D425 kas Of Gr Yay of ye ste ye HY gh 
werd O3 SLES) 955 GEN Ly art 
«Islam is built upon five (pillars): Testifying that there is no 
deity worthy of worship except Allah and that Muhammad is 
the Messenger of Allah, establishing the prayer, giving Zakah, 
fasting Ramadan and Hajj to the House.»!"! 
There are many other Hadiths on this subject. 


The Meaning of Salah 


In the Arabic language, the basic meaing of Saldh is 
supplication. In religious terminology, Salah is used to refer to 
the acts of bowing and prostration, the remaining specified 
acts associated with it, specificed at certain times, with those 
known conditions, and the characteristics, and requirements 
that are well-known about it. 


fn TAS *. gst ar Sure 42 we 7 4 oe 7 Se, 
42559 BG GS WE SO Gi GEE aullh> 
€4. And who have faith in what is revealed to you and in what 


was revealed before you, and in the Hereafter they are certain.> 
Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


7 te thay 4 rhe, Para 7 fe, 
EAS oe dal by A ALG Gop oally> 


ad oe 


(1 Fath AlBari 1:64 and Muslim 1:45. 


116 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢And who have faith in what is revealed to you and in what was 
revealed before you.}> means, “They believe in what Allah sent you 
with, and in what the previous Messengers were sent with, they 
do not distinguish between (believing) them, nor do they reject 
what they brought from their Lord.”!”! 


CE oae po LVS 
¢And in the Hereafter they are certain> that is the resurrection, 
the standing (on the Day of Resurrection), Paradise, the Fire, 
the reckoning and the the Scale that weighs the deeds (the 
Miz4n).'?| The Hereafter is so named because it comes after this 
earthly life. 


Attributes of the Believers 


The people described here (2:4) are those whom Allah 
described in the preceding Ayah, 


WBS A BP ALE Te Cy os eee oe 0 Se 
Bois ety Ly BUS Stas Call hb ontlp 


<Those who have faith in the Ghayb and perform Salah, and 
spend out of what we have provided for them.> 


Mujahid once stated, “Four Aydt at the beginning of Strat 
Al-Baqarah describe the believers, two describe the 
disbelievers, and thirteen describe the hypocrites.”°) The four 
Ayat mentioned in this statement are general and include 
every believer, whether an Arab, non-Arab, or a person of a 
previous Scripture, whether they are Jinns or humans. All of 
these attributes complement each other and require the 
existence of the other attributes. For instance, it is not 
possible that one believes in the Unseen, performs the prayer 
and gives Zakah without believing in what the Messenger of 
Allah #§ and the previous Messengers were sent with. The same 
with certainty in the Hereafter, this is not correct without that, 
for Allah has commanded the believers, 


ae 


cit hells ts BIS all CISIG a t55 oh Yin Gen 33 

woe ae 
453 x SA 
I At-Tabari 1:244. 


2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:39. 
3) At-Tabari 1:239. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 117 


€O you who believe! Believe in Allah, and His Messenger, and 
the Book (the Qur’an) which He has revealed to the Messenger, 
and the Book which He sent own to those before (him)> 
(4:136), 


oat Gu 8s Sah ib Gt Bo iy tl LITLE Sp 
3.5 S45 eI5 ey Ju Cy A 

¢And argue not with the People of the Book, unless it be in (a 
way) that is better, except with such of them as do wrong; and 
say (to them): ‘We believe in that which has been revealed to 


us and revealed to you; our Ilah (God) and your Ilah (God) is 
One (i.e. Allah)’> (29:46), 


4a CL LS OF G ae cast 3 Gt Glyp 


€O you who have been given the Book (Jews and Christians)! 
Believe in what We have revealed (to Muhammad 38) 
confirming what is (already) with you> (4:47), and, 


i Ky SAG LANG SIS SE EI Us he 


€533 


<Say (O Muhammad #%): ‘‘O People of the Book (Jews and 
Christians)! You have nothing until you act according to the 
Tawrah (Torah), the Injil (Gospel), and what has (now) been 
revealed to you from your Lord (the Qur'an) .”"> (5:68). 


Also, Allah the Exalted described the believers; 

Fs AS ois BY gon ¥ SEG os & oh LAG Seat cup 
45425 ot Ol oe oS 

<The Messenger (Muhammad #x) believes in what has been 

revealed to him from his Lord, and (so do) the believers. Each 

one believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His 

Messengers. (They say,) “We make no distinction between any 

of His Messengers”’> (2:285), and, 

rs NSE SS tds ih Gen Sal 


And those who believe in “Allah and His Messengers and make 
no distinction between any of them (Messengers)> (4:152), 


118 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


This is a sample of the Aydt that indicate that the true 
believers all believe in Allah, His Messengers and His Books. 

The faithful among the People of the Book, have a special 
significance here, since they believe in their Books and in all 
of the details related to that, so when such people embrace 
Islam and sincerely believe in the details of the religion, then 
they will get two rewards. As for the others, they can only 
believe in the previous religious teachings in a general way. 
For instance, the Prophet #% stated, 


wily Gi ss icy Bslad Vy BIS 6 Cush Jaf sis tip 
so gh ash 
tWhen the People of the Book narrate to you, neither reject nor 


affirm what they say. Rather, say, ‘We believe in what was 
revealed to us and what was revealed to you.’»!"| 


However, the faith that many Arabs have in the religion of 
Islam as it was revealed to Muhammad 3 might be more 
complete, encompassing and firmer than the faith of the People 
of the Book who embraced Islam. Therefore, if the believers in 
Islam among the People of the Book gain two rewards, other 
Muslims who have firmer Islamic faith might gain an equal 
reward that compares to the two the People of the Book gain 
(upon embracing Islam). And Allah knows best. 


mut aya oe 08 Ec ek ae 2 oR 
4G All 2 Aaa pe of was & ADI> 
<5. They are on guidance from their Lord, and they are the 
successful .> 


Guidance and Success are awarded to the Believers 
Allah said, 
ook 
<ai> 
<They are> refers to those who believe in the Unseen, establish 
the prayer, spend from what Allah has granted them, believe in 
what Allah has revealed to the Messenger and the Messengers 


before him, believe in the Hereafter with certainty, and prepare 
the necessary requirements for the Hereafter by performing 


I'l Abu Dawud 4:59. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 119 


vasigt Y ows 

dt Sel ihe tps oly Spy 
tert oe Fer, IL fe Sere? O Ld SIG 
a ' fe aist YY 
aes prob 9 te old cle alt nae O-4y 

gos .7 Ar e3fR LL. “4 
@ rue sie shes ea cl 
oa : 27 Ge the FZ ea. feo, 
ined bles AIL ibs hn J es 


e 24<5 prer 


oe aes Reeser 4 <8 
! esl hate GMail eae 


grr yeas ec 7% ees 42. Aha aed 
Lael 318 HF age 9h O ayansles 


27 oe ST 


good deeds and 
avoiding the 
prohibitions. Allah 


then said, 
sas &> 
€On guidance} 


meaning, they are 
(following) a light, 
guidance, and have 
insight from Allah, 


PARE SET OD) SPs SOC, LN E152 2355 
Soper sAG ie eA abi BV 
53083 GI SEY SH 5.4 wits ST 
HLA rT PE AN aie ate 2h 
15155 GB SLY hs Ga at 
GPG cp bit Hie ys Entei Lan gall 
Peabo VND Sst ee YS 
aq tyes Cue a ee 


es, Ger cA 
JLB ANG MASS G 5,428 


pe ow fhe 
diplacll @ ASI > 
¢And they are the 
successful meaning, 
in this world and the 
Hereafter. They shall 
have what they seek 
and be saved from the 
evil that they tried to 
avoid. Therefore, they 
will have rewards, 
eternal life in 
Paradise, and safety 
from the torment that 
Allah has prepared for 


eedstrrs vie 


2 cotthay 
1G) RASS) SVT Pah Ce 


His enemies. 
42525 V dal J A bik nyse he Wis all Sp 
<6. Verily, those who disbelieve, it is the same to them whether 


you warn them or do not warn them, they will not believe.> 
Allah said, 


Ey Mt A> 


<Verily, those who disbelieve> meaning, covered the truth and hid 
it. Since Allah has written that they would do so, it does not 
matter if you (0 Muhammad 2%) warn them or not, they would 
still have disbelieved in what you were sent with. Similarly, 
Allah said, 


(ca Care 


- # ose fe Gene 8 GF tee be ee te Reg 
Wy S Rh Jee PL FT MSE Yay cae 4k ce all Bp 


120 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
460) 90 Bacal 
<Truly, those against whom the Word (wrath) of your Lord has 


been justified, will not believe. Even if every sign should come 
to them, until they see the painful torment> (10:96-97). 


About the rebellious People of the Book, Allah said, 
Cs LAS Egan KS CASH IB salt 5 a5) 

€And even if you were to bring to the People of the Book (Jews 

and Christians) all the Aydt, they would not follow your Qiblah 

(prayer direction) (2:5). 

These Aydt indicate that whomever Allah has written to be 
miserable, they shall never find anyone to guide them to 
happiness, and whomever Allah directs to misguidance, he 
shall never find anyone to guide him. So do not pity them - O 
Muhammad 3% - deliver the Message to them. Certainly, 
whoever among them accepts the Message, then he shall gain 
the best rewards. As for those who turn away in rejection, do 
not feel sad for them or concerned about them, for 


42d ck; pai ak Epp 
€Your duty is only to. convey (the Message) and on Us is the 
reckoning> (13:40), and, 


th.sa5 SF & ib os ch ap 
<But you are only a warner. And Allah is a Wakil (Disposer of 
affairs, Trustee, Guardian) over all things> (11:12). 


‘Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said about 
Allah’s statement, 


qe SV Bat FA iolale cede 1s Lyi” oll Ap 
<Verily, those who disbelieve, it is the same to them whether 
you (O Muhammad #2) warn them or do not warn them, they 
will not believe> 
“That the Messenger of Allah 3% was eager for all the people to 
believe and follow the guidance he was sent with. Allah 
informed him that none would believe except for those whom 


He decreed happiness for in the first place, and none would 
stray except those who Allah has decreed to clo so in the first 


ee 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 121 


place”!!! 
qv tebe Side A he acd G5 ks KS esl & SI 
€7. Allah has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, 


and on their eyes there is a covering. Theirs will be a great 
torment>. 


Meaning of Khatama 
As-Suddi said that, 


as 

¢Khatama Allah> means, “Allah has sealed.”?! Qatadah said 
that this Ayah means, “Shaytan controlled them when they 
obeyed him. Therefore, Allah sealed their hearts, hearing and 
sight, and they could neither see the guidance nor hear, 
comprehend or understand.”*! Ibn Jurayj said that Mujahid 
said, 

a ei 

Allah has set a seal on their hearts», “A stamp. It occurs when sin 
resides in the heart and surrounds it from all sides, and this 
submersion of the heart in sin constitutes a stamp, meaning a 
seal.”4! Ibn Jurayj also said that the seal is placed on the 
heart and the hearing.'*! In addition, Ibn Jurayj said, that 
‘Abdullah bin Kathir narrated that Mujahid said, “The stain is 
not as bad as the stamp, the stamp is not as bad as the lock 
which is the worst type.”°! Al-A'mash said, “Mujahid 
demonstrated with his hand while saying, They used to say 
that the heart is just like this - meaning the open palm. When 
the servant commits a sin, a part of the heart will be rolled up - 
and he rolled up his index finger. When the servant commits 
another sin, a part of the heart will be rolled up’ - and he rolled 
up another finger, until he rolled up all of his fingers. Then he 


(1) At-Tabari 1:252. 

2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:44. 
3! tid. 

41 ibn Abi Hatim 1:44. 
ISI At-Tabari 1:259. 

[4] Ibid. 


122 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


said, ‘Then, the heart will be sealed.’ Mujahid also said that 
this is the description of the Ran (refer to 83:14).”!! 

Al-Qurtubi said, “The Ummah has agreed that Allah has 
described Himself with sealing and closing the hearts of the 
disbelievers, as a punishment for their disbelief. Similarly, 
Allah said, 

425 (de i ob SD 
«Nay, Allah has set a seal upon their hearts because of their 
disbelief (4:155).”"! 
He then mentioned the Hadith about changing the hearts, 
(in which the Prophet #4 supplicated), 


tds Ye GE 25 pth le wp 
tO You Who changes the hearts, make our hearts firm on Your 
religion. » 


He also mentioned the Hadith by Hudhayfah recorded in the 
Sahih, in which the Messenger of Allah 3 said, 
Kes wal i Sb oy oY pede Olth ie jah Joh 
Saal cae ytd le nd a ES RT GH GI ty 
Boy 3461 5G Jay 25.8 ca Gb Be a a gb 
5 ISG Os Go YBa 3 sis 
‘The Fitan (trials, tests) are offered to the hearts, just as the 
straws that are sewn into a woven mat, one after another. Any 
heart that accepts the Fitan, then a black dot will be engraved 
on it. Any heart that rejects the Fitan, then a white dot will be 
engraved on it. The hearts will therefore become two categories : 
white, just like the barren rock; no Fitnah shall ever harm this 
category as long as the heavens and earth still exist. Another 
category is black, just as the cup that is turned upside down, 
for this heart does not recognize righteousness or renounce 
evil .r!>) 
Ibn Jarir said, “The truth regarding this subject is what the 


1] At-Tabari 1:258. 
[21 4)-Qurtubi 1:187. 
(31 Muslim 1:128. 


Stirah 2, Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 123 


authentic Hadith from the Messenger of Allah # stated. Abu 
Hurayrah narrated that the Messenger of Allah #% said, 
SEEN EF OE OE ab Gi a5> ES S55 CS COE Sag Sp 
KP NS Bs OE coh Sign WS a gh Se 2515 315 by 5 ae 
EWES HEE pps fe Ob 
‘When the believer commits a sin, a black dot will be engraved 
on his heart. If he repents, refrains and regrets, his heart will 
be polished again. If he commits more errors, the dots will 


increase until they cover his heart. This is the Ran (stain) that 
Allah described, 


43S WEE pg GGL KD 
<Nay! But on their hearts is the Ran (stain) which they used to 
earn>” (83:14). 
At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa’i and Ibn Majah recorded this Hadith, 
and At-Tirmidhi said that it is Hasan Sahih"! 
The Meaning of Ghishadwah 
Reciting the Ayah, 


di 55 ish & BED 


Allah has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing>, then 
pausing, then continuing with, 


ished 5d 
¢And on their eyes there is a Ghishawah (covering)> is accurate, for 
the stamp is placed on the heart and the hearing while the 
Ghishawah, the covering, is appropriately placed on the eyes. 
In his Tafsir, As-Suddi said that Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn Mas‘td 
said about Allah’s statement, 
€Allah has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing}, 


“So that they neither understand nor hear. Al!ah also said that 
He placed a covering on their sight, meaning eyes, and so, 


" Tuhfat AlLAhwadhi 9:254, An-Nasa'i in Al-Kubra 6:509, and Ibn 
Majah 2:1418. 


124 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


they do not see.”!! 


The Hypocrites 


We mentioned that four Aydt in the beginning of Surat Al- 
Baqarah described the believers. The two last Aydt (2:6-7) 
describe the disbelievers. Afterwards, Allah begins to describe 
the hypocrites who show belief and hide disbelief. Since the 
matter of the hypocrites is vague and many people do not 
realize their true reality, Allah mentioned their description in 
detail. Each of the characteristics that Allah used to described 
them with is a type of hypocrisy itself. Allah revealed Strat 
Bard’ah {chapter 9) and Surat Al-Mundfiqin (chapter 63) about 
the hypocrites. He also mentioned the hypocrites in Surat An- 
Ndr (24) and other Surahs, so that their description would be 
known and their ways and errors could be avoided. Allah said, 


Gal oil Sta Stedt bts AT FIs Bb te Se et Sd 
42858 yu Gy sachs yy RSPAS “5 aay 

48. And of mankind, there are some who say: ‘We believe in 

Allah and the Last Day” while in fact they do not believe>. 


€9. They try to deceive Allah and those who believe, while they 
only deceive themselves, and perceive (it) not!> 


Meaning of Nifaq 

Nifaq means to show conformity - or agreement - and to 
conceal evil. Nifag has several types: Nifaq in the creed that 
causes its people to reside in Hell for eternity, and Nifaq in 
deed, which is one of the major sins, as we will explain soon, 
Allah willing. Ibn Jurayj said of the hypocrite that, “His actual 
deeds are different from what he publicizes, what he conceals 
is different from what he utters, his entrance and presence are 
not the same as his exit and absence.”!7! 


The Beginning of Hypocrisy 


The revelations about the characteristics of the hypocrites 
were revealed in Al-Madinah, this is because there were no 


(1 At-Tabari 1:266. 
(21 At-Tabari 1:270. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 125 


hypocrites in Makkah. Rather the opposite was the situation 
in Makkah, since some people were forced to pretend that they 
were disbelievers, while their hearts concealed their faith. 
Afterwards, the Messenger of Allah #% migrated to Al-Madinah, 
where the Ansar from the tribes of Aws and Khazraj resided. 
They used to worship idols during the pre-Islamic period of 
ignorance, just as the rest of the Arab idolators. Three Jewish 
tribes resided in Al-Madinah, Banu Qaynugqa‘allies of Al- 
Khazraj, Banu An-Nadir and Banu Qurayzah-allies of the Aws. 
Many members of the Aws and Khazraj tribes embraced Islam. 
However, only a few Jews embraced Islam, such as ‘Abdullah 
bin Salam. During the early stage in Al-Madinah, there weren't 
any hypocrites because the Muslims were not strong enough to 
be feared yet. On the contrary, the Messenger of Allah 3 
conducted peace treaties with the Jews and several other Arab 
tribes around Al-Madinah. Soon after, the battle of Badr 
occurred and Allah gave victory to Islam and its people. 
‘Abdullah bin Ubayy bin Salul was a leader in Al-Madinah. He 
was Al-Khazraj’s chief, and during the period of Jahiliyyah he 
was the master of both tribes - Aws and Khazraj. They were 
about to appoint him their king when the Message reached Al- 
Madinah, and many in Al-Madinah embraced Islam. Ibn Saltl’s 
heart was filled with hatred against Islam and its people. When 
the battle of Badr took place, he said, “Allah’s religion has 
become apparent.” So he pretended to be Muslim, along with 
many of those who were just like him, as well as many among 
the People of the Book. It was then that hypocrisy began in Al- 
Madinah and among the surrounding nomad tribes. As for the 
Emigrants, none of them were hypocrites, since they emigrated 
willingly (seeking the pleasure of Allah). Rather, when a Muslim 
would emigrate from Makkah, he would be forced to abandon 
all of his wealth, offspring and land; he would do so seeking 
Allah’s reward in the Hereafter. 


The Tafsir of Ayah 2:8 
Muhammad bin Ishaq narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 
Cea hs AM 1G Bb te Je et Sa5> 


¢And of mankind, there are some who say: “We believe in 
Allah and the Last Day” while in fact they do not believe > 


126 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


“This refers to the hypocrites among the Aws and Khazraj and 
those who behaved as they did.”!!! 

This is how Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and As- 
Suddi explained this Ayah. Allah revealed the characteristics 
of the hypocrites, so that the believers would not be deceived 
by their outer appearance, thus saving the believers from a 
great evil. Otherwise, the believers might think that the 
hypocrites were believers, when in reality they are disbelievers. 
To consider the sinners as righteous people is extremely 
dangerous, Allah said, 

kG ob GS AAT oll hh te Sas om eth 5) 
4And of mankind, there are some who say: “We believe in Allah and 
the Last Day” while in fact they do not believe> meaning, they utter 
these false statements only with their tongues, just as Allah 
said, 
CAS iy the ih At SA) ay AB UG Sash Bae 1p 

«When the hypocrites come to you (O Muhammad 23), they 

say: “We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of 

Allah.” Allah knows that you are indeed His Messenger> 

(63:1). 

This Ayah means that the hypocrites utter these statements 
only when they meet you, not because they actually believe 
what they are saying. The hypocrites emphasize their belief in 
Allah and the Last Day with their words, when that is not the 
case in reality. Therefore, Allah stated that the hypocrites lie in 
their testimony of creed, when He said, 


455305 Sul Of AH a> 


¢And Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars .> 
(63:1), and, 


Cincadty ph VSD 
€while in fact they believe not > 
Allah said, 
Eiicte GAG al on > 
(1 At-Tabari 1:269. 


DN ered 


ee eae 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 127 


<They try to deceive Allah and those who believe». The hypocrites 
show belief outwardly while concealing disbelief. They think 
that by doing this, they will mislead Allah, or that the 
statements they utter will help them with Allah, and this is an 
indication of their total ignorance. They think that such 
behavior will deceive Allah, just as it might deceive some of the 
believers. Similarly, Allah said, 
mh Wat & A oe Se © A ies we at 
CHGS 


¢On the Day when Allah will resurrect them all together ; then 
they will swear to Him as they swear to you. And they think 
that they have something (to stand upon). Verily, they are 
liars! (58:18). 


Hence, Allah refuted their way by saying, 
€é pass Gs warts Ms Dp5h 5 


<While they only deceive themselves, and perceive (it) not!» Allah 
stated that the hypocrites only deceive themselves by this 
behavior, although they are unaware of this fact. Allah also 
said, 
deeah 585 ail 50% Saxli 3y> 
<Verily, the hypocrites try to deceive Allah, but it is He Who 
deceives them> (4:142). 


Also, Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that Ibn Jurayj commented on 
Allah’s statement, 


Ad 2 ode 28 OR AR cate st 
treed 585 ail SF Gaxttil 3p 


€Verily, the hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but it is He Who 
deceives them>, 


“The hypocrites pronounce, There is no deity worthy of 
worship except Allah’ seeking to ensure the sanctity of their 
blood and money, all the while concealing disbelief.”!) Said 
said that Qatadah said, ; 


GS Bl fa Dire oh vs pl 5N5 Sh Uae IE oe eit 5p 


(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:46. 


128 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
4.0 G25 5 AN Sy O5% U5 Yn 
¢And of mankind, there are some who say: “We believe in 
Allah and the Last Day’’ while in fact they believe not. They 


try to deceive Allah and those who believe, while they only 
deceive themselves, and perceive (it) not! > 


“This is the description of a hypocrite. He is devious, he says 
the truth with his tongue and defies it with his heart and 
deeds. He wakes up in a condition other than the one he goes 
to sleep in, and goes to sleep in a different condition than the 
one he wakes up in. He changes his mind just like a ship that 
moves about whenever a wind blows.”!'! 


ao PSY ve < Ae ae MIF 5f 417% rd ee 
4 7G9555 (OO SH St5e paid by tat mss G2 ess a> 


- 410. In their hearts is a disease and Allah has increased their 
disease. A painful torment is theirs because they used to tell 
lies .> 


The Meaning of ‘Disease’ in this Ayah 


As-Suddi narrated from Abu Malik and (also) from Abu 
Salih, from Ibn ‘Abbas, and (also) Murrah Al-Hamdani from 
Ibn Mas‘ad and other Companions that this Ayah, 


€BE waes8 ap 


qin their hearts is a disease> means, ‘doubt’, and, 


dias p55) 
¢And Allah has increased their disease> also means ‘doubt’?! 
Mujahid, Tkrimah, Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi'‘ 
bin Anas and Qatadah also said similarly. ! ‘Abdur-Rahman 
bin Zayd bin Aslam commented on, 


432 pest ad 
«In their hearts is a disease>, “A disease in the religion, not a 
physical disease. They are the hypocrites and the disease is the 


0) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:47. 
[2] At-Tabari 1:280 
(3! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:48. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 129 
doubt that they brought to Islam. 
¢5s tt $503) 


¢And Allah has increased their disease> meaning, increased them 
in shameful behavior.”"! He also recited, 


deter 


SF mg g all OG cays By ey RBG on all hp 

digety ICH meals 
¢As for those who believe, it has increased their faith, and they 
rejoice. But as for those in whose hearts is a disease, it will add 
disgrace to their disgrace .> (9:124-125) 


and commented, “Evil to their evil and deviation to their 
deviation.” This statement by ‘Abdur-Rahman is true, and it 
constitutes a punishment that is compatible to the sin, just as 
the earlier scholars stated. Similarly, Allah said, 


4M LOSE CHS 6B AIG FEET SGD 
«While as for those who accept guidance, He increases their 
guidance and grants them their piety> (47:17). 
Allah said next, 
455K BE Gp 
<Because they used to tell lies>. The hypocrites have two 
characteristics, they lie and they deny the Unseen. 

The scholars who stated that the Prophet # knew the 
hypocrites of his time have only the Hadith of Hudhayfah bin 
Al-Yaman as evidence. In it the Prophet #¢ gave him the names 
of fourteen hypocrites during the battle of Tabak. These 
hypocrites plotted to assassinate the Prophet # during the 
night on a hill in that area. They planned to excite the 
Prophet’s camel, so that she would throw him down the hill. 


Allah informed the Prophet # about their plot, and the Prophet 
%% told Hudhayfah their names. 


As for the other hypocrites, Allah said about them, 
Reis Y gta Je ie oT al es be HT is SIS Shgd 
€ wAaroe ae 


[ At-Tabari 1:280. 


130 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢And among the bedouins around you, some are hypocrites, 
and so are some among the people of Al-Madinah who persist in 
hypocrisy; you (O Muhammad #) know them not, We know 
them} (9:101), and, 


oe ES ET gy Sheth Be mall gh Shetl 5 ol Bp 
If the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and 
those who spread false news among the people in Al-Madinah 
do not cease, We shall certainly let you overpower them, then 
they will not be able to stay in it as your neighbors but a little 
while. Accursed, they shall be seized wherever found, and killed 


with a (terrible) slaughter> (33:60-61). 


These Aydt prove that the Prophet #& was not informed about 
each and everyone among the hypocrites of his time. Rather, 
the Prophet # was only informed about their characteristics, 
and he used to assume that some people possessed these 
characteristics. Similarly, Allah said, 


Cares on . ositorte Sy, “EAN odo rah gre te 
dal oI 8 B25 Ai A EGY AS ST 


<Had We willed, We could have shown them to you, and you 
should have known them by their marks; but surely, you will 
know them by the tone of their speech! (47:30). 


The most notorious hypocrite at that time was ‘Abdullah bin 
Ubayy bin Salil; Zayd bin Arqam - the Companion - gave 
truthful testimony to that effect. In addition, ‘Umar bin Al- 
Khattab once mentioned the matter of Ibn Saldal to the Prophet 
#, who said, 

col pe tat of Syd Saag of gst Sp 


«] would not like the Arabs to say to each other that 
Muhammad 33 is killing his Companions .»!") 


Yet, when Ibn Salul died, the Prophet #4 performed the 
funeral prayer for him and attended his funeral just as he used 
to do with other Muslims. It was recorded in the Sahih that the 
Prophet 3 said, 


(1) Al-Bukhari 4905, Muslim 2584. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 131 


We Se ol! 
«! was given the choice (to pray for him or not), so I chose. » 
In another narration, the Prophet 2 said, 
255 G7 sate ie thy i SM tial gh 
Uf I knew that by asking (Allah to forgive Ibn Salil) more than 


seventy times that He would forgive him, then I would do 
that 0!) 


Shoda fo ay Wat $2 Oy NG oN g GALE Yi J5 a> 

a5 TSS 
411. And when it is said to them: “Do not make mischief on 
the earth,” they say: “We are only peacemakers.’’> 


412. Verily, they are the ones who make mischief, but they 
perceive not.> 


Meaning of Mischief 


In his Tafsir, As-Suddi said that Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn Mas‘ad 
commented, 
Wi Soptt 32 CH IG NT g DALE Y ai ia asd 
€And when it is said to them: ‘Do not make mischief on the 
earth,” they say: ‘We are only peacemakers .""> 


"They are the hypocrites. As for, 
<2 g UL Y> 
€"Do not make mischief on the earth’’>, that is disbelief and acts 


of disobedience.” Abu Jafar said that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said 
that Abu Al-‘Aliyah said that Allah’s statement, 


431 g ALE Y 2H 5a > 
<And when it is said to then: “Do not make mischief on the 


earth,’’», means, “Do not commit acts of disobedience on the 
earth. Their mischief is disobeying Allah, because whoever 


() Fath ALBari 8:184, Muslim 4:2141. 
21 At-Tabari 1:288. 


132 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


disobeys Allah on the earth, or commands that Allah be 
disobeyed, he has committed mischief on the earth. Peace on 
both the earth and in the heavens is ensured (and earned) 
through obedience (to Allah).”"! Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and 
Qatadah said similarly.|2! 


Types of Mischief that the Hypocrites commit 


Ibn Jarir said, “The hypocrites commit mischief on earth by 
disobeying their Lord on it and continuing in the prohibited 
acts. They also abandon what Allah made obligatory and 
doubt His religion, even though He does not accept a deed 
from anyone except with faith in His religion and certainty of 
its truth. The hypocrites also lie to the believers by saying 
contrary to the doubt and hesitation their hearts harbor. They 
give as much aid as they can, against Allah’s loyal friends, 
and support those who deny Allah, His Books and His 
Messengers. This is how the hypocrites commit mischief on 
earth, while thinking that they are doing righteous work on 
earth,”5 

The statement by Ibn Jarir is true, taking the disbelievers as 
friends is one of the categories of mischief on the earth. Allah 
said, 

1 NT Oy a SS UE Se at ees ew SG 
€And those who disbelieve are allies of one another, if you do 
not do this (help each other), there will be turmoil and 
oppression on the earth, and great mischief.> (8:73), 


In this way Allah severed the loyalty between the believers 
and the disbelievers. Similarly, Allah said, 


ANCE A GAA Sdtil od oe deat oS US ¥ in Salt ep 
€O you who believe! Do not take disbelievers as Awliya’ 
(protectors or helpers or friends) instead of believers. Do you 


Ol thn Abi Hatim 1:50. 
21 thn Abi Hatim 1:51. 
IS] At-Tabari 1:289 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 133 


wish to offer Allah a manifest proof against yourselves?> 
(4:144). 


Allah then said, 


Eile 8 SE Ts GT Se SCENT a5 g Guat yp 
<Verily, the hyprocrites will be in the lowest depth of the Fire; 
no helper will you find for them> (4:145). 

Since the outward appearance of the hypocrite displays 
belief, he confuses the true believers. Hence, the deceitful 
behavior of the hypocrites is an act of mischief, because they 
deceive the believers by claiming what they do not believe in, 
and because they give support and loyalty to the disbelievers 
against the believers. 

If the hypocrite remains a disbeliever (rather than pretending 
to be Muslim), the evil that results from him would be less. 
Even better, if the hypocrite becomes sincere with Allah and 
makes the statements that he utters conform to his deeds, he 
will gain success. Allah said, 


CV Gple 22 OY 6 SAT g LAB Y oi ds a> 
¢And when it is said to them: ‘Do not make mischief on the earth,” 
they say: ‘We are only peacemakers.» meaning, “We seek to be 
friends with both parties, the believers and the disbelievers, 


and to have peace with both parties.” Similarly, Muhammad 
bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 


Aalst 32 GB) Ste wil g LAL 9 AG Ja isd 
¢And when it is said to them: “Do not make mischief on the earth,” 
they say: ‘We are only peacemakers.’"> means, “We seek to make 
amends between the believers and the People of the Book.”!! 
Allah said, 
4G TSG SLO 8 VD 

<Verily, they are the ones who make mischief, but they perceive 
not.>. This Ayah means that the hypocrites’ behavior, and their 


claim that it is for peace, is itself mischief, although in their 
ignorance, they do not see it to be mischief. 


I] Thn Abi Hatim 1:52. 


134 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


WS Sap WE Mai Gare TT ia sah ds 5} 
455055 ¥ 6 


€13. And when it is said to them: Believe as the people 
believe,” They say: “Shall we believe as the fools have 
believed?” Verily, they are the fools, but they do not know.» 


Allah said that if the hypocrites are told, 
Eat Sou TT ic 


<‘Believe as the people believe,”’>, meaning, ‘Believe just as the 
believers believe in Allah, His angels, His Books, His 
Messengers, Resurrection after death, Paradise and Hellfire, etc. 
And obey Allah and His Messenger by heeding the 
commandments and avoiding the prohibitions.’ Yet the 
hypocrites answer by saying, 
GaN gan TS Bash Dap 

<“Shall we believe as the fools have believed?’’> they meant (may 
Allah curse the hypocrites) the Companions of the Messenger 
of Allah #. This is the same Tafsir given by Abu Al-‘Aliyah and 
As-Suddi in his Tafsir, with a chain of narration to Ibn ‘Abbas, 
Ibn Mas‘id and other Companions.'"] This is also the Tafsir of 
Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam.!?! 
The hypocrites said, “Us and them having the same status, 
following the same path, while they are fools?!” The fool’ is the 
ignorant, simple-minded person who has little knowledge in 
areas of benefit and harm. This is why, according to the 
majority of the scholars, Allah used the term foolish to include 
children, when He said, 


fig DS Se HSA Geet BS GH 
¢And do not give your property, which Allah has made a 
means of support for you, to the foolish} (4:5). 


Allah answered the hypocrites in all of these instances. For 
instance, Allah said here, 


EGE 28 DD 


(1) At-Tabari 1:293. 
[2] At-Tabari 1:294. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 135 


<Verily, they are the fools». Allah thus affirmed that the 
hypocrites are indeed the fools, yet, 


agi SS 


<But they know not}. Since they are so thoroughly ignorant, the 
hypocrites are unaware of their degree of deviation and 
ignorance, and such situation is more dangerous, a severer 
case of blindness, and further from the truth than one who is 
aware. 


EG Ke Gy OE yet Sh Ey ae YG Le all sp 

CP GASS Sl 8 BL py to BI Sy Et 
414. And when they meet those who believe, they say: “We 
believe,” but when they are alone with their Shayatin (devils), 
they say: “Truly, we are with you; verily, we were but 
mocking ."’> 


€15. Allah mocks at them and leaves them increasing in their 
deviation to wander blindly .> 


The Hypocrites’ Cunning and Deceit 


Allah said that when the hypocrites meet the believers, they 
proclaim their faith and pretend to be believers, loyalists and 
friends. They do this to misdirect, mislead and deceive the 
believers. The hypocrites also want to have a share of the 
benefits and gains that the believers might possibly acquire. 
Yet, 


digest Sy SE > 
<But when they are alone with their Shayatin>, meaning, if they are 
alone with their devils, such as their leaders and masters 
among the rabbis of the Jews, hypocrites and idolators. 
Human and Jinn Devils 


Ibn Jarir said, “The devils of every creation are the 
mischievous among them. There are both human devils and 
Jinn devils. Allah said, 


bot 1 ee hd w fe oo offen te ey wg bar ot eee A nee 

Jl S55 et D} 4S ed Sold oyi Gbtt O12 35 J GEE G5 > 
£, 
Sits 


136 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢And so We have appointed for every Prophet enemies — 
Shayatin (devils) among mankind and Jinn, inspiring one 
another with adorned speech as a delusion (or by way of 
deception)> (6:112). 


The Meaning of ‘Mocking’ 
Allah said, 
(Se by E> 
<They say: “Truly, we are with you’’>. Muhammad bin Ishaq 


reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Ayah means, “We are 
with you, 


Cinyh CD 
<Verily, we were but mocking>, meaning, we only mock people 


(the believers) and deceive them.”!!! Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn 
‘Abbas said that the Ayah, 
Cis A yd 
«Verily, we were but mocking>, means, “We (meaning the 
hypocrites) were mocking the Companions of Muhammad.”?! 
Also, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and Qatadah said similarly.'*! Allah’s 
statement, 
CESK pas 8 AS iy ES BD 

¢Allah mocks at them and leaves them increasing in their deviation to 
wander blindly» answers the hypocrites and punishes them for 
their behavior. Ibn Jarir commented, “Allah mentioned what He 
will do to them on the Day of Resurrection, when He said, 

al Sais Wt Ja SS oe OE OI i ahs Lastly act Se gp 

CS 5 oe ys ST as AIL dos YG 

<€On the Day when the hypocrites — men and women — will 

say to the believers: “Wait for us! Let us get something from 

your light!’’ It will be said : “Go back to your rear! Then seek a 


DT at-Tabari 1:300. 
2] tid. 
IS! hid. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 137 


light!” So a wall will be put up between them, with a gate 
therein. Inside it will be mercy, and outside it will be 
torment.> (57:13), and, 


pata oh gs Sy eect EY * Be ch ys thi iyi oil Hoe Wy> 
¢And let not the disbelievers think that Our postponing of their 
punishment is good for them. We postpone the punishment only 
so that they may increase in sinfulness.> (3:178).” 


He then said, “This, and its like, is Allah’s mockery of the 
hypocrites and the people of Shirk.” 


ae 


The Hypocrites suffering for their Plots 


Allah stated that He will punish the hypocrites for their 
mockery, using the same terms to describe both the deed and 


its punishment, although the meaning is different. Similarly, 
Allah said, 


ep He bpaheOSe ess ee oe Beer ator Bee 
OB PA ch cae 55 i eee sd 
<The recompense for an offense is an offense equal to it; but 


whoever forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is with 
Allah> (42:40), and, 


‘eth Sle elkzt 53> 


<Then whoever transgresses (the prohibition) against you, 
transgress likewise against him} (2:194). 


The first act is an act of injustice, while the second act is 
an act of justice. So both actions carry the same name, while 
being different in reality. This is how the scholars explain 
deceit, cunning and mocking when attributed to Allah in the 
Qur’an. Surely, Allah exacts revenge for certain evil acts with a 
punishment that is similar in nature to the act itself. We 
should affirm here that Allah does not do these things out of 
joyful play, according to the consensus of the scholars, but as 
a just form of punishment for certain evil acts. 


Meaning of ‘Leaves them increasing in their deviation to 
wander blindly ’ 


Allah said, 


138 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Cite ph 3 Ald 

¢Allah mocks at them and leaves them increasing in their deviation to 

wander blindly». As-Suddi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn Mas‘id 


and several other Companions of the Messenger of Allah # said 
that, 


«5 
dand leaves them increasing» means, He gives them respite.!!! 


Also, Mujahid said, “He (causes their deviation) to increase.”!! 
Allah said; 
408 Y goat a AEG oe ey 2 aacelp 

€Do they think that by the wealth and the children with which 

We augment them. (That) We hasten to give them with good 

things. Nay, but they perceive not.> (23:55-56). 

Ibn Jarir commented, “The correct meaning of this Ayah is 
‘We give them increase from the view of giving them respite 
and leaving them in their deviation and rebellion.’ Similarly, 
Allah said, 

Sg BES GF oy ER IS ch pea oe 

Sei se 
¢And We shall turn their hearts and their eyes away (from 
guidance), as they refused to believe in it the first time, and We 
shall leave them in their trespass to wander blindly.” 

(6:110).'3! 

Tughyan used in this Ayah means to transgress the limits, 
just as Allah said in another Ayah, 

(L6G 9 Kis ii w 8 gp 
<Verily, when the water Taghd (rose) beyond its limits, We 
carried you in the ship> (69:11). 
Also, Ibn Jarir said that the term ‘Amah, in the Ayah means, 
‘deviation’. He also said about Allah’s statement, 
(1) At-Tabari 1:311. 
[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:57. 
{3] At-Tabari 1 :307 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (Part-1) 139 


Sse aasith a> 
éin their deviation to wander}, “In the misguidance and disbelief 
that has encompassed them, causing them to be confused and 
unable to find a way out of it. This is because Allah has 
stamped their hearts, sealed them, and blinded their vision. 


Therefore, they do not recognize guidance or find the way out of 
their deviation.” 


a ced the wre odhowd COL OE tte oye tl oe ae 4 <4 
Ea lee WE MS ABE 5 1S ag TLE ET Gall ald 


416. These are they who have purchased error with guidance, 
so their commerce was profitless. And they were not guided .> 


In his Tafsir, As-Suddi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn 
Mas‘tid commented on; 


sig GN ES Gl ily 


€These are they who have purchased error with guidance} saying it 
means, “They pursued misguidance and abandoned guidance.” 
Mujahid said, “They believed and then disbelieved,” while 
Qatadah said, “They preferred deviation to guidance.” 
Qatadah’s statement is similar in meaning to Allah’s statement 
about Thamtud, 


desitil HGH sect Yes 45 Ch> 


<And as for Thamid, We granted them guidance, but they 
preferred blindness to guidance> (41:17). 


In summary, the statements that we have mentioned from 
the scholars of Tafsir indicate that the hypocrites deviate from 
the true guidance and prefer misguidance, substituting 
wickedness in place of righteousness. This meaning explains 
Allah’s statement, 


sigh GLEN ULE Gall ASHP 


4These are they who have purchased error with guidance}, 
meaning, they exchanged guidance to buy misguidance. This 
meaning includes those who first believed, then later 
disbelieved, whom Allah described, 


(4 At-Tabari 1:309. 


140 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


rng ; via Be A ten oh cap 
re ea ete eT eo oe r Lad ers v2 
ASULACITE CSE Mes he 


¢That is because they 
believed, and then 
disbelieved; therefore 
their hearts are sealed> 
(63:3). 

The Ayah also 
includes those who 
preferred deviation 
over guidance. The 
hypocrites fall into 
several categories. 
This is why Allah 
said, 


BE U5 bk aos sp 
<cnte 


Seerre 


Po barat ES i partite 
sar SSID Stes BES 
AEE a, Jai e355 
(256 As alts Sale es 
SEAS er AN cynic a WwtaE Js 
Sie AKL KEHOE O 48.8 


bit katy. Ghai dag BNI 
EAA AIA IG SE, oily 
Alysha PAGE E315 8 oF 3541516 
(ELE Hibs sob O Grote 


€So their commerce was 
profitless. And they 
were not guided>, 
meaning their trade 
did not succeed nor 
were they righteous or rightly guided throughout all this. In 
addition, Ibn Jarir narrated that Qatadah commented on the 
Ayah, 


or 


OYA SASS pales $5 5a 


CEE YE U5 BSE 255 Sp 
<So their commerce was profitless. And they were not guided, “By 
Allah! I have seen them leaving guidance for deviation, leaving 
the Jamd‘ah (the community of the believers) for the sects, 
leaving safety for fear, and the Sunnah for innovation.”") Ibn 
Abi Hatim also reported other similar statements.!?! 


BIS pay C55 WE u SAG UE OF BEN ot yor pytcp 


(1) At-Tabari 1:316. 
21 thn Abi Hatim 1:60. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 141 


41g Vd Ge ea YT pals 
€17. Their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire; 


then, when it illuminated all around him, Allah removed their 
light and left them in darkness. (So) they could not see>. 


€18. They are deaf, dumb, and blind, so they return not (to the 
right path) .> 


The Example of the Hypocrites 


Allah likened the hypocrites when they bought deviation with 
guidance, thus acquiring utter blindness, to the example of a 
person who started a fire. When the fire was lit, and 
illumnitated the surrounding area, the person benefited from it 
and felt safe. Then the fire was suddenly extinguished. 
Therefore, total darkness covered this person, and he became 
unable to see anything or find his way out of it. Further, this 
person could not hear or speak and became so blind that even 
if there were light, he would not be able to see. This is why he 
cannot return to the state that he was in before this happened 
to him. Such is the case with the hypocrites who preferred 
misguidance over guidance, deviation over righteousness. This 
parable indicates that the hypocrites first believed, then 
disbelieved, just as Allah stated in other parts of the Qur’an. 

Allah’s statement, 


pans ant 235 
¢Allah removed their light? means, Allah removed what benefits 


them, and this is the light, and He left them with what harms 
them, that is, the darkness and smoke. Allah said, 


48 3 A> 
And left them in darkness}, that is their doubts, disbelief and 
hypocrisy. 
faxes I> 
<(So) they could not see> meaning, they are unable to find the 
correct path or find its direction. In addition, they are, 


<p 
deaf and thus cannot hear the guidance, 


142 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
€(53> 


¢dumb> and cannot utter the words that might benefit them, 
Se 2 


dand blind> in total darkness and deviation. Similarly, Allah 
said, 


isl 9 Bi C5 SG FONT 28 I Cap 

<Verily, it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the hearts which 
are in the breasts that grow blindp (22:46) and this why they 
cannot get back to the state of guidance that they were in, 
since they sold it for misguidance. 


oF" ea 4. Se OP we er Aeee Bory ore a 2 [eae oe 1° ft 
oie Hypa)! yt mr 3 pazel Sle op ae mals Pe) Acs of we > 
“~ e . fete eo wes ron? ba aca 7 we cine 5 gate Fi Se, o8 
Nab'y ad Wyma oe AG! &¥ SOFA A ALS 36S Wapsst LZ aly Ssal 
Bl 65 tk se or Ste 0 OO Se ore reni Zo age wet 
C58 gt FE BS mally yey Cdl tat 6 IS UG ie 
€19. Or like a rainstorm in the sky, bringing darkness, 
thunder, and lightning. They thrust their fingers in their ears 


to keep out the stunning thunderclap for fear of death. But 
Allah ever encompasses the disbelievers. > 


420. The lightning almost snatches away their sight, whenever 
it flashes for them, they walk therein, and when darkness covers 
them, they stand still. And if Allah willed, He could have taken 
away their hearing and their sight. Certainly, Allah has power 
over all things.> 


Another Parable of the Hypocrites 


This is another parable which Allah gave about the 
hypocrites who sometimes know the truth and doubt it at 
other times. When they suffer from doubt, confusion and 
disbelief, their hearts are, 

did > 
<Like a Sayyib>, meaning, “The rain", as Ibn Mas‘ad, Ibn ‘Abbas, 
and several other Companions have confirmed!!! as well as 


Dl At-Tabari 1:334. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 143 
Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, ‘Ata’, Al-Hasan Al- 
Basri, Qatadah, ‘Atiyah Al-‘Awfi, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani, As-Suddi 
and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas.'! Ad-Dahhak said “It is the clouds."!! 
However, the most accepted opinion is that it means the rain 
that comes down during, 


$2Ab> 
¢darkness>, meaning, here, the doubts, disbelief and hypocrisy. 
3635 


¢thunder> that shocks the hearts with fear. The hypocrites are 
usually full of fear and anxiety, just as Allah described them, 


ide iss ¥ 5ce> 
They think that every cry is against them> (63:4), and, 


no ee 


hd JIM OPE ASE KG A ead A ah < ph > 
CP5K8 Bh ANGIE Tepe eek 
<They swear by Allah that they are truly of you while they are 
not of you, but they are a people who are afraid. Should they 
find refuge, or caves, or a place of concealment, they would 
turn straightway thereto in a swift rush> (9:56-57). 
{e5ild 


<The lightning», is in reference to the light of faith that is 
sometimes felt in the hearts of the hypocrites, 
45,5, Sad Sits eSait 555 GOS S opti g “3 Pasa 5h > 


<They thrust their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning 
thunderclap for fear of death. But Allah ever encompasses the 
disbelievers>, meaning, their cautiousness does not benefit them 
because they are bound by Allah’s all-encompassing will and 
decision. sameae Allah said, 


orbs ot ‘a, fw! Caer 3 Ys oi b OSS Sep oF Lo aN fp 
qe42 


(1) fbn Abi Hatim 1:66. 
(2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:67. 


144 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢Has the story reached you of two hosts. Of Fir‘awn (Pharaoh) 
and Thamud? Nay! The disbelievers (persisted) in denying. 
And Allah encompasses them from behind! (85:17-20). 


Allah then said, 


eich CLE sit 3p 
<The lightning almost snatches away their sight> meaning, because 
the lightning is strong itself, and because their comprehension 
is weak and does not allow them to embrace the faith. Also, ‘Ali 
bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on the 
Ayah, 


Ephcal GLE Sit 365) 


<The lightning almost snatches away their sight>, “The Qur'an 
mentioned almost all of the secrets of the hypocrites.”") ‘Ali bin 
Abi Talhah also narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 


443 5 Ai AGI ep 


qWhenever it flashes for them, they walk thereiny, “Whenever the 
hypocrites acquire a share in the victories of Islam, they are 
content with this share. Whenever Islam suffers a calamity, 
they are ready to revert to disbelief.”.'7) Similarly, Allah said, 


4, Si 8 A ee A SS Sg 
¢And among mankind is he who worships Allah on the edge: If good 


befalls him, he is content with that.) (22:11). Also, Muhammad bin 
Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 


C6 ce AN HY oa GEE AS A Tap 

«Whenever it flashes for them, they walk therein, and when darkness 
covers them, they stand still>, 

“They recognize the truth and speak about it. So their speech 
is upright, but when they revert to disbeleif, they again fall 
into confusion.”9! This was also said by Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Al- 
Hasan Al-Basri, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and As-Suddi, 
who narrated it from the Companions, and it is the most 


Ul At-Tabari 1:349. 
21 hid. 
3) At-Tabari 1:346. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 145 


obvious and most correct view, and Allah knows best.!"! 

Consequently, on the Day of Judgment, the believers will be 
given a light according to the degree of their faith. Some of 
them will gain light that illuminates over a distance of several 
miles, some more, some less. Some people’s light will glow 
sometimes and be extinguished at other times. They will, 
therefore, walk on the Sirat (the bridge over the Fire) in the 
light, stopping when it is extinguished. Some people will have 
no light at all, these are the hypocrites whom Allah described 
when He said, 


(ese BG Stash 5g SS oe SE GOT ay Lay gh Jy 

<5 
€On the Day when the hypocrites — men and women — will 
say to the believers: “Wait for us! Let us get something from 


your light!”’ It will be said to them; ‘Go back to you rear! Then 
seek a light!’’» (57:13). 


Allah described the believers, 
We 6 ES BE th al GA od eG eT i ED 
esi 
¢On the Day you shall see the believing men and the believing 
women — their light running forward before them and by their 


right hands. Glad tidings for you this Day! Gardens under 
which rivers flow (Paradise)> (57:12), and, 


GS petty pedl HS GR Re in Gal Gai Sl ge I ED 
Cis pat Jeo FU 5th GAS 
<The Day that Allah will not disgrace the Prophet (Muhammad 
3%) and those who believe with him. Their Light will run 
forward before them and (with their Records — Books of deeds) 
in their right hands. They will say: “Our Lord! Keep perfect 
our Light for us [and do not put it off till we cross over the 
Sirat (a slippery bridge over the Hell) safely] and grant us 
forgiveness. Verily, You are Able to do all things’’> (66:8). 
Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad 


(4 thn Abi Hatim 1:75. 


146 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


commented on, 
idl SR Ga Sd 


<Their Light will run forward before them>, “They will pass on the 
Sirdt. according to their deeds. The light that some people have 
will be as big as a mountain, while the light of others will be as 
big as a date tree. The people who will have the least light are 
those whose index fingers will sometimes be lit and 
extinguished at other times.”'! Ibn Abi Hatim also reported 
that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Every person among the people of 
Tawhid (Islamic Monotheism) will gain a light on the Day of 
Resurrection. As for the hypocrite, his light will be 
extinguished. When the believers witness the hypocrite’s light 
being extinguished, they will feel anxious. Hence, they will 
supplicate, 


4653 B pl HD 
4Our Lord! Keep perfect our Light for us>.”'?!| Ad-Dahhak bin 
Muzahim said, “On the Day of Resurrection, everyone who has 
embraced the faith will be given a light. When they arrive at the 


Sirat, the light of the hypocrites will be extinguished. When the 
believers see this, they will feel anxious and supplicate, 


465 6 AED 
€Our Lord! Keep perfect our Light for us>.” 


Types of Believers and Types of Disbelievers 


Consequently, there are several types of people. There are 
the believers whom the first four Ayd@t (2:2-5) in Strat Al- 
Baqarah describe. There are the disbelievers who were 
described in the next two Aydt. And there are two categories of 
hypocrites: the complete hypocrites who were mentioned in the 
parable of the fire, and the hesitant hypocrites, whose light of 
faith is sometimes lit and sometimes extinguished. The parable 
of the rain was revealed about this category, which is not as 
evil as the first category. 


I At-Tabari 23 :3179. 
[2] al-Hakim 2:495. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 147 


This is similar to the parables that were given in Sdrat An- 
Nur (chapter 24). Like the example of the believer and the faith 
that Allah put in his heart, compared to a brightly illuminated 
lamp, just like a rising star. This is the believer, whose heart 
is built on faith and receiving its support from the divine 
legislation that was revealed to it, without any impurities or 
imperfections, as we will come to know, Allah willing. 

Allah gave a parable of the disbelievers who think that they 
have something, while in reality they have nothing; such 
people are those who have compounded ignorance. Allah said, 


Gr tig J pls ty Ko Se es ee I ist ie Sih 

As for those who disbelieved, their deeds are like a mirage in a 

desert. The thirsty one thinks it to be water, until he comes up 

fo it, he finds it to be nothing> (24:39). 

Allah then gave the example of ignorant disbelievers, simple 
in their ignorance. He said; 


Ci perdi Geis Seine Bins Ay 
€Or (the state of a disbeliever) is like the darkness in a vast 
deep sea, overwhelmed by waves, topped by dark clouds, (layers 
of) darkness upon darkness: if a man stretches out his hand, he 
can hardly see it! And he for whom Allah has not appointed 
light, for him there is no light (24:40). 

Therefore, Allah divided the camp of the disbelievers into two 
groups, advocates and followers. Allah mentioned these two 
groups in the beginning of Strat Al-Hajj, 

Eph Ses be eA UG we Sed 
€And among mankind is he who disputes about Allah, without 


knowledge, and follows every rebellious (disobedient to Allah) 
Shaytan (devil) (devoid of every kind of good)> (22:3), and, 


Ce SV BT ke ib Le SUG 55> 
¢And among men is he who disputes about Allah, without 
knowledge or guidance, or a Book giving light (from Allah)> 
(22:8). 
Furthermore, Allah has divided the group of the believers in 


148 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


the beginning of Surat Al-Wadqi‘ah (56) and at the end. He also 
divided them in Surat Al-Insdn (76) into two groups, the 
Sdbiqun (those who preceded), they are the “near ones" 
(Muqaribtin) and Ashdb Al-Yamin (the companions of the right), 
and they are righteous (Abra). 

In summary, these Aydt divide the believers into two 
categories, the near ones and righteous. Also, the disbelievers 
are of two types, advocates and followers. In addition, the 
hypocrites are divided into two types, pure hypocrites and 
those who have some hypocrisy in them. The Two Sahihs 
record that ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr said that the Prophet #% said, 

es 45 LIS be Belg od LIE 5 LIE WE OE 0s 35 ts Soh 


COLE Sell hy EE De5 BY SiS 5s He ye LS GN 3 


tWhoever has the following three (characteristics) will be a pure 
hypocrite, and whoever has one of the following three 
characteristics will have one characteristic of hypocrisy, unless 
and until he gives it up. Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie. 
Whenever he makes a covenant, he proves treacherous. 
Whenever he is entrusted, he breaches the trusts!"! 


Hence, man might have both a part of faith and a part of 
hypocrisy, whether in deed, as this Hadith stipulates, or in the 
creed, as the Ayah (2:20) stipulates. 


Types of Hearts 
Imam Ahmad recorded Abu Sa‘id saying that the Messenger 
of Allah # said 
BIE Ne bass GN Ais fay cit fb a Se CH taf 
cist 38 Stab Shi 1S S52 Sih OB fies 5 YKs Ls 
th ged Us ys Ci oh, sh ts GE Cth ut; 
FSS 53 DN! Joy Stay Otay 1s HS Qa Lith ol “SF oy 
ib ely Gl AG SoS YES 43 GLEN Cf th way dh 
ese Cb gM Je Soe 35h 
‘The hearts are four (types): polished as shiny as the radiating 


0) Fath ALBari 1:111, Muslim 1:78. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 149 


lamp, a sealed heart with a knot tied around its seal, a heart 
that is turned upside down and a wrapped heart. As for the 
polished heart, it is the heart of the believer and the lamp is the 
light of faith. The sealed heart is the heart of the disbeliever. 
The heart that is turned upside down is the heart of the pure 
hypocrite, because he had knowledge but denied it. As for the 
wrapped heart, it is a heart that contains belief and hypocrisy. 
The example of faith in this heart, is the example of the herb 
that is sustained by pure water. The example of hypocrisy in it, 
is the example of an ulcer that thrives on puss and blood. 
Whichever of the two substances has the upper hand, it will 
have the upper hand on that heart). This Hadith has a Jayid 
Hasan (good) chain of narration.!"! 
Allah said, 
C8 ot FB Sy AG pynity 5G Ot AE Sp 
¢And if Allah willed, He would have taken away their hearing and 
their sight. Certainly, Allah has power over all thingsy. Muhammad 


bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on Allah’s 
statement, 


deny als iyeiy OS Gt EE Sp 
¢And if Allah willed, He would have taken away their hearing and 


their sight», “Because they abandoned the truth after they had 
knowledge in it.” 


455 1 F ES 


<Certainly, Allah has power over all i Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
“Allah is able to punish or pardon His servants as He wills.”! 
Ibn Jarir commented, “Allah only described Himself with the 
ability to do everything in this Ayah as a warning to the 
hypocrites of His control over everything, and to inform them 
that His ability completely encompasses them and that He is 
able to take away their hearing and sight.”!*! 

Ibn Jarir and several other scholars of Tafsir stated that 
these two parables are about the same kind of hypocrite. So 


(1 Ahmad 3:17. 
21 ibn Abi Hatim 1:76 
13) At-Tabari 1:361. 


150 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


the ‘or’ mentioned in, 


4 fs iS sp 
€Or like a rainstorm fron. *. ky» means ‘and’, just as the Ayah, 
ON SC oe EB LD 
¢And obey neither a <i: *: ‘isbeliever anoug them}. Therefore, 
‘or’ in the Ayah inclu:. - oice of using either example for 
the hypocrites. Also, 4! Cu: i said that ‘or’ means, “To show 


compatibility of the two cli. .ces, just as when one says, ‘Sit 
with Al-Hasu.. or Ibn Sirin.’ According to the view of Az- 
Zamakhshari, ‘so it means each of these persons is the same as 
the other, so you may sit with either one of them.’ The meaning 
of ‘or’ thus becomes ‘either.’ Allah gave these two examples of 
the hypocrites, because they both perfectly describe them.” 

I (Ibn Kathir) say, these descriptions are related to the type 
of hypocrite, because there is a dificr: nce between them as we 
stated. For instance, Allah mentioned these types in Surat 
Bard’ah (chapter 9) when He repea‘.d the statement, “And 
among them” three times, describing their types, 
characteristics, statements and deeds. So the two examples 
mentioned here describe two types of hypocrites whose 
characteristics are similar. For instance. Allah gave two 
examples in Surat An-Nir, one for the acvacates of disbelief 
and one for the followers of disbelief, He said, 


a SE GBA Wht aby 


As for those who disbelieved, their deeds are like a mirage in a 
desert} (24:39), until, 


tb J lS 
<Or (the state of a disbeliever) is like the darkness in a vast 
deep sea> (24:40). 


The first example is of the advocates of disbelief who have 
complex ignorance, while the second is about the followers 
who have sue ignorance. Allah knows best. 


See oll ceeds SET KS ow Selly SE oll 1K Lite at Glad 
56 I Us, oct & ay Oe ae tb SAT 


% 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 151 
4 ris (BG Oa oe 
421. O mankind! Worship your Lord (Allah), Who created you 
and those who were before you so that you may acquire 
Taqwa .> 
€22. Who has made the earth a resting place for you, and the 
sky as a canopy, and sent down water (rain) from the sky and 
brought forth therewith fruits as a provision for you. Then do 
not set up rivals unto Allah (in worship) while you know (that 
He alone has the right to be worshipped) .> 


Tawhid Al-Ulahiyyah 

Allah next mentioned His Oneness in divinity and stated that 
He has favored His servants by bringing them to life after they 
did not exist. He also surrounded them with blessings, both 
hidden and apparent. He made the earth a resting place for 
them, just like the bed, stable with the firm mountains. 


486, KAY 
¢And the sky as a canopy> meaning, ‘a ceiling’. Similarly, Allah 
said in another Ayah, 

4b GE 5 iy Ube ie al csp 


¢And We have made the heaven a roof, safe and well-guarded. 
Yet they turn away from its signs (i.e. sun, moon, winds, 
clouds)> (21:32). 


dic a cp Lad Shp 
¢And sends down for you water (rain) from the sky> meaning, 
through the clouds, when they need the rain. Hence, Allah 
caused the various types of vegetation and fruits to grow as a 
means of sustenance for people and their cattle. Allah 
reiterated this bounty in various parts of the Qur’an. 


There is another Ayah that is similar to this Ayah (2:22), 
that is, Allah’s statement, 


deanter ” voek weerter Reet td 472 7h nr Potea ae 
$i) pa gash rare ke LA OS Ni Si Jae clid 
.71-t + 3% aon + 2 ste eye © olay oe 
<ingkll 25 ih CS eats 2 SOS Cc G 
<It is He Who has made for you the earth as a dwelling place 


152 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


and the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape and made 
your shapes good (looking) and has provided you with good 
things. That is Allah, your Lord, so Blessed be Allah, the Lord 
of all that exists (40:64). 
The meaning that is reiterated here is that Allah is the 
Creator, the Sustainer, the Owner and Provider of this life, all 
that is in and on it. Hence, He alone deserves to be 


worshipped, and no one and nothing is to be associated with 
Him. This is why Allah said next, 


4 isis 73s Wd 3 LE Gp 
<Then do not set up rivals unto Allah (in worship) while you 
know (that He alone has the right to be worshipped)» (2:22). 

The Two Sahihs record that Ibn Mas‘td said, “I said to the 
Messenger of Allah 2%, ‘Which evil deed is the worst with Allah?’ 
He said, 

ws 385 14 a jes fp 

‘To take an equal with Allah, while He alone created 

you 011) 
Also, Mu‘adh narrated the Prophet’s statement, 

ad oy 1S 255 53085 OF Goats Le dl SG Gh 

«Do you know Allah’s right on His servants? They must 
worship Him alone and refrain from associating anything with 
Him in worship .'?| Another Hadith states, 


3d tS Ob Git oth Gs Yd hy SoG ody Gn od w SST BLS ve 
«None of you should say, ‘What Allah and so-and-so person 
wills. Rather, let him say, ‘What Allah wills, and then what 
so-and-so person wills .'°! 


A Hadith with the same Meaning 


Imam Ahmad narrated that Al-Harith Al-Ash‘ari said that the 
Prophet of Allah 3 said, 


(1) Fath ALBari 8:350 and Muslim 1:90. 
{2} Fath Al-Bari 13:359 and Muslim 1:59. 
[3] Ahmad 5:384, 394, 398. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagaraht (1 - 24) (Part-1) 153 


Sy Jas ob ous Sk pln ole 655 cs Al Jes at Sp 
oe me J OB ly eke Sf ss oh Se es Of gui Us AE 3; 
iploss Of Joey os ibs be ad Sf pus Vk ay is ah psi 
Of ake on SEAT ety sche Sf Sf uy gid Sf Ub bp 
red os BH 6 O55 A es bY Gh sf oil 
iy 06 Soothe ft, at a Gyn le GS el Se 
aot 19205 OF BUST ee test Sf 5555 See Gael Of qua Va yl 
Bry Me pale ty he SHE 5 JES Gs JG Sg 3 9 13 EY; 
oe 5% Obs SE ok Sy SE dss ke hed Ga 
HEIL Sy Eg 15 UF YG 2326 55509 RHE at 15 ROR; 
er Aga 5 pile 6 ah iG ote tg) G5 Cee a bg 
fp dev aS Ele Ble he Gs ety JES OB OG peal 
BBN S505 A coy be sot Be CB ta 6 Sle yy ahi 
22 ig ad Sel ae yy oy LAS Hil al Jos ys Gus Jo Og 
rly Bl pi Lk gas 8 pe a gal SIGH Jo a 0 
in 88 G Gash by i 3o55 Lat tee Yl OG eK 

tail 33 3 OE 11 othe 
*Allah commanded Yahya bin Zakariya to implement five 
commands and to order the Children of Israel to implement 
them, but Yahya was slow in carrying out these commands. 
‘Isa said to Yahya, ‘You were ordered to implement five 
commands and to order the Children of Israel to implement 
them. So either order, or I will do it.’ Yahya said, ‘My brother! 
I fear that if you do it before me, I will be punished or the earth 
will be shaken under my feet.’ Hence, Yahya bin Zakariya 
called the Children of Israel to Bayt Al-Magqdis (Jerusalem), 
until they filled the Masjid. He sat on the balcony, thanked 
Allah and praised him and then said, ‘Allah ordered me to 


implement five commandments and that I should order you to 
adhere to them. The first is that you worship Allah alone and 


154 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


not associate any with Him. The example of this command is 
the example of a man who bought a servant from his money 
with paper or gold. The servant started to work for the master, 
but was paying the profits to another person. Who among you 
would like his servant to do that? Allah created you and 
sustains you. Therefore, worship Him alone and do not 
associate anything with Him. I also command you to pray, for 
Allah directs His Face towards His servant's face, as long as 
the servant does not turn away. So when you pray, do not turn 
your heads to and fro. I also command you to fast. The example 
of it is the example of a man in a group of men and he has 
some musk wrapped in a piece of cloth, and consequently, all of 
the group smells the scent of the wrapped musk. Verily, the 
odor of the mouth of a fasting person is better before Allah than 
the scent of musk. I also command you to give charity. The 
example of this is the example of a man who was captured by 

~ the enemy. They tied his hands to his neck and brought him 
forth to cut off his neck. He said to them, ‘Can I pay a ransom 
for myself?’ He kept ransoming himself with small and large 
amounts until he liberated himself. I also command you to 
always remember Allah. The example of this deed is that of a 
man who the enemy is tirelessly pursuing. He takes refuge in a 
fortified fort. When the servant remembers Allah, he will be 
resorting to the best refuge from Satan.» 


Al-Harith then narrated that the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 


eels ig 4 aa ee wus ie a al vs eo Gi5o 
bi 325 & ig cigs be a Able oi oS 5 ia TY 4 
fees 1658 cele st p53 cles we Oty : dus ey ele bby 

tal Se ce Sekt Jey 32 Gl su Ge wgacl 
tAnd I order you with five commandments that Allah has 
ordered me. Stick to the Jama‘ah (community of the faithful), 
listen and obey (your leaders) and perform Hijrah (migration) 
and Jihad for the sake of Allah. Whoever abandons the Jama‘ah, 


even the distance of a hand span, will have removed the tie of 
Islam from his neck, unless he returns. Whoever uses the 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 2 155 


slogans of Jahiliyah (the pre.. “mic period of ignorance) he will 
be among those kneeling in ‘aiannam (Hellfire).» They said. 
“O Messenger of Allah! F-- if he prays and fasts?” He 
said, ‘Even if he prays, fasis aud claims to be Muslim. So call 
the Muslims with their 1. + that Allah has called them: ‘The 
Muslims, the believing se+. is of Allah,’s!"| 


This is a Hasan Hadith, »nd it contains the statement, “Allah 
has created and sustains you, so worship Him and do not 
associate anything with Him in worship.” This st#tement is 
relevant in the Aydt (2:21-22) we are discussing were and 
supports singling Allah in worship, without partners. 


Signs of Allah’s Existence 


Several scholars of Tafsir, like Ar-Razi and others, used 
these Aydt as an argument for the existence of the Creator, 
and it is a most worthy metliod of argument. Indeed, whoever 
ponders over the things thai exist, the higher and lower 
creatures, their various shapes, colors, behavior, benefits and 
ecological roles, then he will realize the ability, wisdom, 
knowledge, perfection and majesty of their Creator. Once a 
bedouin was asked about the evidence to Allah’s existence, he 
responded, “All praise is due to Allah! The camel’s dung 
testifies to the existence of the camel, and the track testifies to 
the fact that someone was walking. A sky that holds the giant 
stars, a land that has fairways and a sea that has waves, does 
not all of this testify that the Most Kind, Most Knowledgeable 
exists?! 

Hence, whoever gazes at the sky in its immensity, its 
expanse, and the various kinds of planets in it, some of which 
appear stationary in the sky - whoever gazes at the seas that 
surround the land from all sides, and the mountains that were 
placed on the earth to stabilize it, so that whoever lives on 
land, whatever their shape and color, are able to live and 
thrive - whoever reads Allah’s statement, 

ll ah NS Syl ON ic Ft ay SL GI Sd 
CELI wale oe ait HE Ey IS AGT Ce NG ia 
I! Ahmad 4:130. 

21 ar-Razi 2:91. 


156 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€And among the mountains are streaks white and red, of 
varying colours and (others) very black. And likewise, men and 
Ad-Dawabb (moving (living) creatures, beasts) and cattle are of 
various colours. It is only those who have knowledge among His 
servants that fear Allah> (35:27-28). 


Whoever thinks about the running rivers that travel from 
area to area bringing benefit, whoever ponders over what Allah 
has created on earth; various animals and plants of different 
tastes, scents, shapes and colors that are a result of unity 
between land and water, whoever thinks about all of this then 
he will realize that these facts testify to the existence of the 
Creator, His perfect ability, wisdom, mercy, kindness, 
generosity and His overall compassion for His creation. There 
is no deity worthy of worship except Allah, nor is there a Lord 
besides Him, upon Him we rely and to Him we tum in 
repentance. There are numerous Aydt in the Qur’an on this 
subject. 


ood of PAIGE 1255 is of 3 OG OE & HFG 5g ee ad 
SK 85 GM 5 USE eG Uh J of Bias BF 
423. And if you (Arab pagans, Jews, and Christians) are in 
doubt concerning that which We have sent down (i.e. the 
Qur'an) to Our servant (Muhammad #8), then produce a Surah 
(chapter) of the like thereof and call your witnesses (supporters 
and helpers) besides Allah, if you are truthful>. 


24. But if you do it not, and you can never do it, then fear 
the Fire (Hell) whose fuel is men and stones, prepared for the 
disbelievers .> 


The Message of Messenger of Allah # is True 
Allah begins to prove the truth of prophethood after He 
stated that there is no deity worthy of worship except Him. 
Allah said to the disbelievers, 
462 $5 G G5 9 Bem od 
€And if you (Arab pagans, Jews, and Christians) are in doubt 
concerning that which We have sent down (i.e. the Qur'an) to 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 157 


Our servant? meaning, Muhammad %, 
€ 353 (itp 


¢then produce a Stirah (chapter)» meaning, similar to what he 
brought to you. Hence, if you claim that what he was sent with 
did not come from Allah, then produce something similar to 
what he has brought to you, using the help of anyone you wish 
instead of Allah. However, you will not be able to succeed in 
this quest. Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


€SAGED 


<your witnesses» means “Aids.”'! Also, As-Suddi reported that 
Abu Malik said the Ayah means, “Your partners, meaning, 
some other people to help you in that. Meaning then go and 
seek the help of your deities to support and aid you.”?! Also, 
Mujahid said that, 


4SGE (Bib 
<and call your witnesses» means, “People, meaning, wise and 
eloquent men who will provide the testimony that you seek.”*! 
The Challenge 
Allah challenged the disbelievers in various parts of the 
Qur’an. For instance, Allah said in Surat Al-Qasas (28:49), 
Cys Bee yy UA od A Sf ee OS GG ID 
<Say (to them, O Muhammad #3): “Then bring a Book from 
Allah, which is a better guide than these two (the Tawrah 


(Torah) and the Qur'an), that I may follow it, if you are 
truthful’. Also, Allah said in Surat Al-Isrd’ (17:88), 


Sb SS tk AY AS ah, ot dD & Eb Saf ET of sp 
<Say: “If mankind and the Jinn were together to produce the 
like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof, even 


2! At-Tabari 1:376. 
2] thn Abi Hatim 1:84. 
3! thn Abi Hatim 1:85. 


158 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


if they helped one another.”> Allah said in Surat Hud 
(11:13), 
BH gdb ob AMET op (AIG SA ss J Ey lB al le il 
diixs 2S 
<Or they say, “He (Prophet Muhammad :33) forged it (the 
Qur'an).” Say: “Bring you then ten forged Stirahs (chapters) like 
it, and call whomsoever you can, other than Allah (to your help), 
if you speak the truth!’’, and in Surat Yanus (10:37-38), 


SS Sooty KG HM Ssh SG Hh oo SS IG CE OD 
AMES Ups al 35st WS BLA SIE A Rade 5 a DY 
Ciscans A& o Bho 
And this Qur'an is not such as could ever be produced by 
other than Allah (Lord of the heavens and the earth), but it is a 
confirmation of (the revelation) which was before it (i.e. the 
Tawrah, end the Injil), and a full explanation of the Book (i.e. 
Laws decived for mankind) — wherein there is no doubt — 
from the Lord of all that exists.> 
<Or do they say: “He (Muhammad 2%) has forged it?” Say: 
“Bring then a Strah (chapter) like it, and call upon 


whomsoever you can besides Allah, if you are truthful!l’’>. All 
of these Aydt were revealed in Makkah. 


Allah also challenged the disbelievers in the Aydt that were 

revealed in Al-Madinah. In this Ayah, Allah said, 

455 4 He o> 
€And if you (Arab pagans, Jews, and Christians) are in Rayb> 
meaning, doubt. 

dix & UF a> 

<Concerning that which We have sent down (i.e. the Qur'an) to Our 
servant? meaning, Muhammad #2, 

4.825 ot 53 SED 
€titen produce a Stirah (chapter) the like thereof? meaning, similar 


to the Qur’an. This is the Tafsir of Mujahid, Qatadah, Ibn Jarir 
At-Tabari, Az-Zamakhshari and Ar-Razi. Ar-Razi said that this 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1 159 


is the Tafsir of ‘Umar, Ibn Mas‘dd, Ibn ‘Abbas, Al-Hasan Al- 
Basri and the majority of the scholars. And he gave preference 
to this view and mentioned the fact that Allah has challenged 
the disbelievers as individuals and as groups, whether literate 
or illiterate, thus making the challenge truly complete. This 
type of challenge is more daring than simply challenging the 
disbelievers who might not be literate or knowledgeable. This is 
why Allah said, 


4a oe Ay Gd 


<Bring you then ten forged Stirahs (chapters) like itp (11:13), 
and, 


. 
ak nd 


quis S5b Y> 


oe 7k 


<They could not produce the like thereof> (17:88). 


Therefore, this is a general challenge to the Arab disbelievers, 
the most eloquent among all nations. Allah challenged the 
Arab disbelievers both in Makkah and Al-Madinah several 
times, especially since they had tremendous hatred and 
enmity for the Prophet # and his religion. Yet, they were 
unable to succeed in answering the challenge, and this is why 
Allah said, 


Gis Sh AGES ofp 


<But if you do it not, and you can never do it}, indicating that they 
will never be able to answer the challenge. This is another 
miracle, in that, Allah clearly stated without doubt that the 
Qur’an will never be opposed or challenged by anything similar to 
it, for eternity. This is a true statement that has not been 
changed until the present and shall never change. How can 
anyone be able to produce something like the Qur’an, when the 
Qur’an is the Word of Allah Who created everything? How can the 
words of the created ever be similar to the Words of the Creator? 


Examples of the Miracle of the Qur’an 


Whoever reads through the Qur’an will realize that it 
contains various levels of superiority through both the 
apparent and hidden meanings that it mentions. Allah said, 

C28 05 SS Sy cig 2 exe Ssh Sp 


ge ee 


160 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢Alif Lam Ra. (This is) a Book, the verses whereof are perfect 
(in every sphere of knowledge, etc.), and then explained in 
detail from One (Allah), Who is Wise and well-acquainted (with 
all things) (11:1) 


So the expressions in the Qur’aén are perfect and its 
meanings are explained. Further, every word and meaning in 
the Qur’an is eloquent and cannot be surpassed. The Qur’én 
also mentioned the stories of the people of the past; and these 
accounts and stories occurred exactly as the Qur’an stated. 
Also, the Qur’én commanded every type of righteousness and 
forbade every type of evil, just as Allah stated, 

Miss bie G LF 25 
¢And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled in truth and in 

Justice (6:115). 
meaning, true in the stories it narrates and just in its Laws. 
The Qur’4én is true, just and full of guidance. It does not—— 
contain exaggerations, lies or falsehood, unlike Arabic and 
other types of poems that contained lies. These poems, 
conform with the popular statement, “The most eloquent 
speech is the one that contains the most lies!” Sometimes, one 
would find a long poem that mainly contains descriptions of 
women, horses or alcohol. Or, the poem might contain praise 
or the description of a certain person, horse, camel, war, 
incident, fear, lion, or other types of items and objects. Such 
praise or descriptions do not bring any benefit, except shed 
light on the poet’s ability to clearly and eloquently describe 
such items. Yet, one will only be able to find one or two 
sentences in many long poems that elaborate on the main 
theme of the poem, while the rest of the poem contains 
insignificant descriptions and repetitions. 

As for the Qur'an, it is entirely eloquent in the most perfect 
manner, as those who have knowledge in such matters and 
understand Arabic methods of speech and expressions concur. 
When one reads through the stories in the Qur’an, he will find 
them fruitful, whether they were in extended or short forms, 
repeated or not. The more these stories are repeated, the more 
fruitful and beautiful they become. The Qur’an does not 
become old when one repeats reciting it, nor do the scholars 
ever get bored with it. When the Qur’a4n mentions the subject 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 161 


of warning and promises, it presents truths that would make 
solid, firm mountains shake, so what about the 
comprehending, understanding hearts? When the Qur’an 
promises, it opens the hearts and the ears, making them eager 
to attain the abode of peace - Paradise - and to be the 
neighbors of the Throne of the Most Beneficent. For instance, 
on the subject of promises and encouragement, the Qur’an 
said, 


ASKS BO Ue ea Oh os oh ST So Fs wD 
€No person knows what is kept hidden for them of joy as a 
reward for what they used to do} (32:17), and, 


Beer st hve 


<(There will be) therein all that inner selves could desire, and 


all that eyes could delight in and you will abide therein forever> 
(43:71). 


On the subject of warning and discouragement; 
til kK LES Ely 


€Do you then feel secure that He will not cause a side of the 
land to swallow you up) (17:68), and, 


JES A Al As op Of MK GE I at gf ky 
€Do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven (Allah), will 
not cause the earth to sink with you, and then it should quake? 
Or do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven (Allah), 


will not send against you a violent whirlwind? Then you shall 
know how (terrible) has been My warning> (67:16-17). 


On the subject of threats, the Qur’an said, 


4255, Csi > 
¢S0 We punished each (of them) for his sins} (29:40). Also, on 
the subject of soft advice, the Qur’an said, 


Boe th rtd 
fs) 


BU ae BL Miculen YEE A Se BE ay Say 


GE» sie 
458 yo 


162 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<Tell Me, (even) if We do let them enjoy for years. And 
afterwards comes to them that (punishment) which they had 
been promised. All that with which they used to enjoy shall not 
avail them} (26:205-207). 


There are many other examples of the eloquence, beauty, 
and benefits of the Qur'an 


When the Qur’aén is discussing Laws, commandments and 
prohibitions, it commands every type of righteous, good, 
pleasing and beneficial act. It also forbids every type of evil, 
disliked and amoral act. Ibn Mas‘tid and other scholars of the 
Salaf said, “When you hear what Allah said in the Qur’aén 
such as, 


divas dl Gilad 


€O you who believe!>, then listen with full attention, for it either 
contains a type of righteousness that Allah is enjoining, or an 
evil that He is forbidding.” For instance, Allah said, 


LESH ete 5 eet 245 Ley ett os es Gt > 
hye 6 Sil SENG pho Ae CSS 


¢4He (Muhammad 3%) commands then for Al-Ma'rif (i.e. 
Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam has ordained); and 
forbids them from Al-Munkar (i.e. disbelief, polytheism of all 
kinds, and all that Islam has forbidden); he allows them as 
lawful At-Tayyibat(i.e. all good and lawful things), and 
prohibits them as unlawful Al-Khaba’ith (i.e. all evil and 
unlawful things), he releases them from their heavy burdens 
and from the fetters (bindings) that were upon them) (7:157). 


When the Aydt mention Resurrection and the horrors that 
will occur on that Day, and Paradise and the Fire and the joys 
and safe refuge that Allah prepared for His loyal friends, or 
torment and Hell for His enemies, these Aydt contain glad 
tidings or warnings. The Aydt then call to perform good deeds 
and avoid evil deeds, making the life of this world less 
favorable and the Hereafter more favorable. They also establish 
the correct methods and guide to Allah’s straight path and 
just legislation, all the while ridding the hearts of the evil of 
the cursed devil. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) r 163 
The Qur’an is the Greatest Miracle given to the Prophet 


The Two Sahihs record that Abu Hurayrah said that the 
Prophet 3% said, 


Wy Ad ah le ga Gu Se hel IY ye 
ext 5 WE AST SST ST 256 oh arte gh ey dayl gill Sv 


«Every Prophet was given a miracle, the type of which brings 
mankind to faith. What I was given is a revelation that Allah 
sent down to me. Yet, I hope that 1 will have the most 
following on the Day of Resurrection .»\"' 


This is the wording narrated by Muslim. The Prophet 2 
stated that among the Prophets he was given a revelation, 
meaning, he was especially entrusted with the miraculous 
Qur'an that challenged mankind to produce something similar 
to it. As for the rest of the divinely revealed Books, they were 
not miraculous according to many scholars. Allah knows best. 
The Prophet # was also aided with innumerable signs and 
indications that testify to the truth of his prophethood and 
what he was sent with, all thanks and praise is due to Allah. 


Meaning of ‘Stones’ 
Allah said, 
iS S5d GUL HK wh85 Git SOI Leb 

€Then fear the Fire (Hell) whose fuel is men and stones, 

prepared for the disbelievers> (2:24). 

‘Fuel’ is wood, or similar substances, used to start and feed 
a fire. Similarly, Allah said, 

4S Si BG OLS cp 
¢And as for the Qasittin (disbelievers who deviated tium the 
right path), they shall be firewood for Hell> (72:15), and, 


IS io ara { 4B coer peer Ge 3 fo Is et yer ot 

3 TN) ay535 43 al gee Cee al S32 OA OAs i pe 
Pores 2% we pre as - wens 4 

c Salaries a) is Keyony agsie Nob Oe 


"I Fath Al-Bari 8 :619 and Muslim 1:134. 


164 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<Certainly you (disbelievers) and that which you are 
worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell! (Surely) 
you enter it. Had these (idols) been dlihah (gods), they would 
not have entered there (Hell), and all of them will abide 
therein> (21:98-99). 


The stones mentioned here are the giant, rotten, black, 
sulfuric stones that become the hottest when heated, may 
Allah save us from this evil end. It was also reported that the 
stones mentioned here are the idols and rivals that were 
worshipped instead of Allah, just as Allah said, 


Ge i Bh Bs oe DEG peat 
<Certainly you (disbelievers) and that which you are 
worshipping now besides Allah, are (but) fuel for Hell!> 
(21:28). 


Allah’s statement, 
tiga kel 
¢prepared for the disbelievers> 


It appears most obvious that it refers to the Fire that is 
fueled by men and stones, and it also may refer to the stones 
themselves. There is no contradiction between these two views, 
because they are dependent upon each other. ‘Prepared’ 
means, it is ‘kept’ and will surely touch those who disbelieve 
in Allah and His Messenger 3. Ibn Ishaq narrated that 
Muhammad said that Tkrimah or Sa‘d bin Jubayr said that 
Ibn ‘Abbas said, 


igh Kelp 
<prepared for the disbelievers>, 
“For those who embrace the disbelief that you (disbelievers) 
have embraced.”!"! 
Jahannam (Hellfire) exists now 


Many of the Imams of the Sunnah used this Ayah to prove 
that the Fire exists now. This is because Allah said, 


(1) At-Tabari 1:383. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (1 - 24) (Part-1) 165 
425d 


<prepared> meaning, prepared and kept. There are many 
Hadiths on this subject. For instance, the Prophet 2% said, 


GO; Zahi osh 


«Paradise and the Fire had an argument. .»!") 
Also, the Prophet 3% said, 
ab BSE ay ae fof oy Shs a 5 Sten 
a 85 et 


‘The Fire sought the permission of her Lord. She said, ‘O my 
Lord! Some parts of me consumed the other parts.’ And Allah 
allowed her two periods to exhale, one in winter and one in 
summer .»!?) 


Also, there is a Hadith recorded from Ibn Mas‘Ud that the 
Companions heard the sound of a falling object. When they 
asked about it, the Messenger of Allah %& said, 

5 ON hog OM ke Seat ead yw gall sas vis 

‘This is a stone that was thrown from the top of Jahannam 

seventy years ago, but only now reached its bottom.» This 

Hadith is in Sahih Muslim. "! 


There are many Hadiths that are Mutawatir (narrated by 
many different chains of narrations) on this subject, such as 
the Hadiths about the eclipse prayer, the night of Isrd’ etc. 

Allah’s statements, 


¢Then produce a Stirah (chapter) of the like thereof> (2:23), and, 
£43 pad 


€A Stirah (chapter) like itp (10:38) this includes the short and 
long Surahs of the Qur’an. Therefore, the challenge to creation 
stands with regards to both the long and short Strahs, and 


(1 Muslim 4:2186. 
2] ALBukhari no. 527, Tubfat Al-Ahwadhi 7 :317. 
{31 Muslim 4 :2184. 


IEE 
oe \fooae asi aoe 
Ww ont apie 


oe Ee ot 


.¢ ay -& 
OB Lay orqach Eon 


EL Ge sues 


La sib 
pain ree 


o ernie 3 We My 


ore 
Spenco 
core sheer Se G 


ebay sie 


Jahdeesiils 5 gh Su Agra 

= eter Fie WN Tee 
neaistt Ne Ah OA ES 
AQAA KAS SLs 
Je : (Bee NIG SIGE ll 


1 AN me 


AZ ohe rp, & n77 fer 74, 


Psp em 


Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


there is no 
disagreement that I 
know of on this fact 
between the scholars 
of old and new. Before 
he became Muslim, 
‘Amr bin Al-‘As met 
Musaylimah the Liar 
who asked him, 
“What has recently 
been revealed to your 
fellow (meaning 
Muhammad 2) in 
Makkah?” ‘Amr said, 
“A short, yet eloquent 
Surah.” He asked, 
“What is it?” He said, 
J Soy 4 all> 
qn 
<By Al-‘Asr (the time). 
Verily, man is in loss,> 
(103:1-2) 
Musaylimah 
thought for a while 


oe? ol 

and said, “A similar Sdrah was also revealed to me.” ‘Amr 
asked, “What is it?” He said, “O Wabr, O Wabr (i.e. a wild cat), 
you are but two ears and a chest, and the rest of you is 
unworthy and thin.” ‘Amr said, “By Allah! You know that | 
know that you are lying.” 


tide 2ghi Ge x of oh AT ett | ts ns ysl 55> 
Ge ps Ge ey Bb 1S & Gy sal os ie 5 5S on Ue ay 

dicot Ga gh Ect 53 
€25. And give glad tidings to those who believe and do 
righteous good deeds, that for them will be Gardens under 
which rivers flow (Paradise). Every time they will be provided 


with a fruit therefrom, they will say: ‘This is what we were 
provided with before,” and they will be given things in 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 167 


resemblance (i.c. in the same form but different in taste) and 
they shall have therein Azwajun Mutahharatun (purified mates 
or wives), and they will abide therein forever .> 


Rewards of Righteous Believers 


After mentioning the torment that Allah has prepared for His 
miserable enemies who disbelieve in Him and in His 
Messengers, He mentions the condition of His happy, loyal 
friends who believe in Him and in His Messengers, adhere to 
the faith and perform the good deeds. This is the reason why 
the Qur’an was called Mathdni, based on the correct opinion of 
the scholars. We will elaborate upon this subject later. 
Mathani means to mention faith and then disbelief, or vice 
versa. Or, Allah mentions the miserable and then the happy, 
or vice versa. As for mentioning similar things, it is called 
Tashabbuh, as we will come to know, Allah willing. Allah said, 


oe ates ez eZ Six ce ee = - oe othe Se gee 
q ENT Gee Ce Eee ph ol ALG Laces Weta pal 5p 


<And give glad tidings to those who believe and do righteous good 
deeds, that for them will be Gardens under which rivers flow 
(Paradise)>. Consequently, Allah stated that Paradise has rivers 
that run beneath it, meaning, underneath its trees and rooms. 
From Hadiths it is learned that the rivers of Paradise do not 
run in valleys, and that the banks of Al-Kawthar (the Prophet’s 
lake in Paradise) are made of domes of hollow pearls, the sand 
of Paradise is made of scented musk while its stones are made 
from pearls and jewels. We ask Allah to grant Paradise to us, 
for verily, He is the Most Beneficent, Most Gracious. 

Ibn Abi Hatim reported that Abu Hurayrah said that the 
Messenger of Allah 2% said, 


tthngll Jee gat fy Sf SG Cae AG ta sigh 
‘The rivers of Paradise spring from beneath hills, or mountains 
of musk 9!) 


He also reported from Masraq that ‘Abdullah said, “The 
rivers of Paradise spring from beneath mountains of musk.”*! 
1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:87. 

(2! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:88. 


168 Tafsir _Ibn_ Kathir 
The similarity between the Fruits of Paradise 
Allah said next, 


bs, ve Ze ey ob Ue vA co th “¢ 
455 oo Gy call 1h Ub WS oS Ue Ly Cp 


<Every time they will be provided with a fruit therefrom, they 
will say : “This is what we were provided with before’’>. 


Ibn Abi Hatim reported that Yahya bin Abi Kathir said, “The 
grass of Paradise is made of saffron, its hills from musk and 
the boys of everlasting youth will serve the believers with fruits 
which they will eat. They will then be brought similar fruits, 
and the people of Paradise will comment, This is the same as 
what you have just brought us.’ The boys will say to them, 
‘Eat, for the color is the same, but the taste is different. Hence 
Allah’s statement, 


CGE ow HSAs 


€and they will be given things in resemblance>.""| Abu Jafar Ar- 
Razi narrated that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said that Abu Al-‘Aliyah 
said that, 


EGE oy BI5> 
dand they will be given things in resemblancey means, “They look 
like each other, but the taste is different.””! Also, Tkrimah 
said, 

CUES on iFid 
dand they will be given things in resemblance> “They are similar to 
the fruits of this life, but the fruits of Paradise taste better.” 
Sufyan Ath-Thawri reported from Al-A‘mash, from Abu 
Thubyan, that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Nothing in Paradise resembles 
anything in the life of this world, except in name.” In another 


narration, Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Only the names are similar 
between what is in this life and what is in Paradise.”!*) 


|] Tbn Abi Hatim 1:90 
2! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:90 
(3! At-Tabari 1:391. 
4] At-Tabari 1:392. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 169 


The Wives of the People of Paradise are Pure 
Allah said, 


€EGE Gil Ua pid 
qand they shall have therein Azwajun Mutahharatun>. Ybn Abi 
Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Purified from filth and 
impurity.”!"! Also, Mujahid said, “From menstruation, relieving 
the call of nature, urine, spit, semen and pregnancies.””! Also, 
Qatadah said, “Purified from impurity and sin.” In another 
narration, he said, “From menstruation and pregnancies.”!*! 
Further, ‘Ata’, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak, Abu Salih, ‘Atiyah and 
As-Suddi were reported to have said similarly.'*! 
Allah’s statement, 


Ea Ga pasd 

¢and they will abide therein forever meaning ultimate happiness, 
for the believers will enjoy everlasting delight, safe from death 
and disruption of their bliss, for it never ends or ceases. We ask 
Allah to make us among these believers, for He is the Most 
Generous, Most Kind and Most merciful. 

SMM a et Bs vate Secon ere Loe pe td sae poe Ft GRRE 

Loyhig fla, yall OG GY U5 CE UE oe ol ph Y al n> 


s "s Z 
* oes 
? < - 


wy bet SE ag, sul te ONG Whee Gal C5 2s oe Gli al 
bo BM Ge Syke Gt aan Sit Hy aay Lk 05 US oy Gi Vee 
a GS GN gy SL Joe Say OO GAG SpbS cat. 

iy Sasa 
€26. Verily, Allah is not ashamed to set forth a parable even of 
a mosquito or so much more when it is bigger (or less when it 
is smaller) than it. And as for those who believe, they know 
that it is the truth from their Lord, but as for those who 
disbelieve, they say: ‘What did Allah intend by this parable?” 
By it He misleads many, and many He guides thereby. And He 
misleads thereby only the Fasiqin (the rebellious, disobedient to 


(1) At-Tabari 1:295. 
[21 At-Tabari 1:396. 
3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:91. 
{41 ton Abi Hatim 1:92. 


170 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Allah». 
€27. Those who break Allah's covenant after ratifying it, and 


sever what Allah has ordered to be joined and do mischief on 
earth, it is they who are the losers.> 


In his Tafsir, As-Suddi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn Mas‘td, 
and some Companions said; “When Allah gave these two 
examples of the hypocrites” meaning Allah’s statements, 


466 Bat lt eX yhp 


<Their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire, 
and, 


CLS SiS slp 
€Or like a rainstorm from the sky}, “The hypocrites said, ‘Allah’s 


far more exalted than for Him to make such examples.’ So 
Allah revealed these Aydt (2:26-27) up to: 
€Gnichll (> 

qWho are the losersp”.""! Said said that Qatadah said, “Allah 
does not shy away from the truth when He mentions a matter 
as a parable, whether this matter is significant or not. When 
Allah mentioned the flies and the spider in His Book, the people 
of misguidance said, ‘Why did Allah mention these things.’ So 
Allah revealed; 

<Verily, Allah is not ashamed to set forth a parable even of a 

mosquito or so much more when it is bigger (or less when it is 

smaller) than it>."! 


A Parable about the Life of This World 

Abu Ja‘far Ar-Razi reported that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas 
commented on this Ayah (2:26); “This is an example that Allah 
has given for the life of this world. The mosquito lives as long 
as it needs food, but when it gets fat, it dies. This is also the 
example of people whom Allah mentioned in the Qur’an: when 


1 At-Tabari 1:398. 
[2] At-Tabari 1:399. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 171 


they acquire (and collect the delights of) the life of this world, 
Allah then takes them away.” Afterwards, he recited, 

4So, when they forgot (the warning) with which they had been 

reminded, We opened for them the gates of every (pleasant) 

thing> (6:44)!"! 

In this Ayah (2:26) Allah stated that He does not shy away 
or hesitate in making an example or parable of anything, 
whether the example involves a significant or an insignificant 
matter. 

Allah’s statement, 


4p Cd 

4Or so much more when it is bigger than it> Fama fawqaha 
means, something bigger than the mosquito, which is one of 
the most insignificant and tiniest of creatures. Muslim narrated 
that Aishah said that the Messenger of Allah 2% said, 

Be dots GY Tes Vy Bs wt OE ey 

o : ty : 

«No Muslim is harmed by a thorn, Fama fawqaha (or 
something larger), but a good deed will be written for him and 
an evil deed will be erased from his record .s!?) 


So Allah has informed us that there is no matter that is too 
small that is exempt from being used as an example, even if it 
was as insignificant as a mosquito or a spider. Allah said, 

(ae J ll ob oe pt Gal Oy At JE Ge col led 
Cui ats Ly GS St SS a os AT ed 

b Sisarer toa 
<O mankind! A similitude has been coined, so listen to it 
(carefully): Verily, those on whom you call besides Allah, 


cannot create (even) a fly, even though they combine together 
for the purpose. And if the fly snatches away a thing from 


(1) At-Tabari 1:398. 
[2] Muslim 4:1991. 


172 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


them, they will have no power to release it from the fly. So 
weak are (both) the seeker and the sought.> (22:73), 


2 


as a 


’ 


Ch SIT tect JES deh it ot oe LAST it Jp 

Crk Hee J pect ES opi 
<The likeness of those who take (false deities as) Awliya’ 
(protectors, helpers) other than Allah is the likeness of a spider 
who builds (for itself) a house; but verily, the frailest (weakest) 


of houses is the spider's house — if they but knew.> (29:41), 
and, 


BCH EGU ch paw ob ee KE Hs ow GF Ip 
HS ot SAT ti ss as Bb ye F Gel of ei 
a WC OY oF » Sal as pow ee ee Jo; eyes 
Joots a8 5 GA ait g at ah han di oh 2 ys 

enc tit Jabs Quit at 


ay 


<See you not how Allah sets forth a parable? A goodly word as 
a goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and its branches 
(reach) to the sky (i.e. very high). Giving its fruit at all times, 
by the leave of its Lord, and Allah sets forth parables for 
mankind in order that they may remember. And the parable of 
an evil word is that of an evil tree uprooted from the surface of 
earth, having no stability. Allah will keep firm those who 
bel‘eve, with the word that stands firm in life of this world (i.e. 
they will keep on worshipping Allah alone and none else), and 
in the Hereafter. And Allah will cause the Zalimin (polytheists 
and wrongdoers) to go astray those and Allah does what He 
wills.» (14:24-27). Allah said, 


48 & jah VGE se KE I Sp 
¢Allah puts forward the example of (two men ~ a believer and 
a disbeliever); a servant under the possession of another, he has 
no power of any sort> (16:75). He then said, 


DP tee 44 or 7 yea. oo ae fee 
’ . 


£. the oon ot ve “4 A et pete 

ay oF ry nie Je 5a ¥ peal aad he5 SE at 0555 
% orse [ ee? cer ey ee Se oe 2 ged oat 
Ci, Hb BES be oY a 


Surah 2. Al-Baqarah (25 - 49) (Part-1 173 


¢And Allah puts forward (another) example of two men, one of 
them dumb, who has no power over anything, and he is a 
burden on his master; whichever way he directs him, he brings 
no good. Is such a man equal to one who commands justice?» 
(16:76). Also, Allah said, 


Coteps KA Mes Ko Kate Se 
48h 
¢He sets forth for you a parable from your own selves: Do you 
have partners among those whom your right hands possess (i.e. 
your servants) to share as equals in the wealth we have 
bestowed on you?> (30:28). 
Mujahid commented on Allah’s statement, 


QS 5 1365 CIE OS A Ge I di ip 
<Verily, Allah is not ashamed to set forth a parable even of a 
mosquito or so much more when it is bigger than it.> 
“The believers believe in these parables, whether they involve 
large matters or small, because they know that they are the 
truth from their Lord, and Allah guides the believers by these 
parables.”!! 
In his Tafsir, As-Suddi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn Mas‘ad 
and other people among the Companions said, 


digde -4 Lod 
<By it He misleads many>, “Meaning the hypocrites. Allah guides 
the believers with these parables, and the straying of the 
hypocrites increases when they reject the parables that Allah 
mentioned for them which they know are true. This is how 
Allah misleads them.”?! 


oa saeeed> 
¢And He guides thereby> meaning, with the parables, 
> 
<many> from among the people of faith and conviction. Allah 
(1 fbn Abi Hatim 1:93. 
[21 At-Tabari 1:408. 


174 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


adds guidance to their guidance, and faith to their faith, 
because they firmly believe in what they know to be true, that 
is, the parables that Allah has mentioned. This is guidance that 
Allah grants them; 


ial Sy cay Jd a> 
¢And He misleads thereby only the Fasigin (the rebellious, disobedient 
to Allah)>, meaning, the hypocrites. The Arabs say that the date 
has Fasagat, when it comes out of its skin, and they call the 
mouse a Fuwaysigah, because it leaves its den to cause 
mischief. The Two Sahihs recorded ‘A’ishah saying that the 
Messenger of Allah #% said, 


slaty Soils aad Sins saly lip GB Geis pike 
9b Cisig 
‘Five animals are Fawasiq, and they must be killed during 


Ihram and otherwise: the crow, the kite, the scorpion, the 
mouse and the rabid dog.) 


Fasiq, includes the disbeliever and the disobedient. However, 
the Fisq of the disbeliever is worse, and this is the type of 
Fasiq that the Ayah is describing here, because Allah 
described them as, 

Shek Jed A aay Ot SAG Suits wot oS At Ue SLE gatp 
CN Su Si ob BAT GON g 
<Those who break Allah's covenant after ratifying it, and sever 


what Allah has ordered to be joined and do mischief on earth, it 
is they who are the losers.» 


These are the characteristics of the disbelievers and they 
contradict the qualities of the believers. Similarly, Allah said in 
Surat Ar-Ra‘d, 

ode a ete Ait Sect on wee dete oe as ah ace ue 75 

gal SW OT Se et A oS Fi» Sh GG A A > 

C585 Joh Soy MAC BS Be HT 52 GS ais oh 
4H IH te GS 5 


0 Fath ALBari 6 :408 and Muslim 2:856. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 175 


<Shall he then, who knows that what has been revealed unto 
you (O Muhammad 3%) from your Lord is the truth, be like 
him who is blind? But it is only the men of understanding that 
pay heed. Those who fulfill the covenant of Allah and break not 
the Mithag (bond, treaty, covenant). And those who join that 
which Allah has commanded to be joined (i.e. they are good to 
their relatives and do not sever the bond of kinship), and fear 
their Lord, and dread the terrible reckoning.» (13:19-21)> 
until, 


A Pt ay F agate 


3 503 Say A Ah) wah i at Aye 6,2 20> 

Ce aS oh Let A ail A 
4And_ those who break the covenant of Allah, after its 
ratification, and sever that which Allah has commanded to be 
joined (i.e. they sever the bond of kinship and are not good to 
their relatives), and work mischief in the land, on them is the 
curse (i.e. they will be far away from Allah's mercy), and for 
them is the unhappy (evil) home (i.e. Hell) .» (13:25) 


The covenant that these deviant people broke is Allah’s 
covenant with His creation, that is, to obey Him and avoid the 
sins that He prohibited. This covenant was reiterated in Allah’s 
Books and by the words of His Messengers. Ignoring this 
covenant constitutes breaking it. 

It was said that the Ayah (2:27) is about the disbelievers and 
the hypocrites among the People of the Book. In this case, the 
covenant that they broke is the pledge that Allah took from 
them in the Tawrah to follow Muhammad 34 when he is sent 
as a Prophet, and to believe in him, and in what he was sent 
with. Breaking Allah’s covenant in this case occured when the 
People of the Book rejected the Prophet # after they knew the 
truth about him, and they hid this truth from people, even 
though they swore to Allah that they would do otherwise. Allah 
informed us that they threw the covenant behind their backs 
and sold it for a miserable price. 

It was also reported that the Ayah (2:27) refers to all 
disbelievers, idol worshippers and hypocrites. Allah took their 
pledge to believe in His Oneness, showing them the signs that 
testify to His Lordship. He also took a covenant from them to 
obey His commands and refrain from His prohibitions, 


176 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


knowing that His Messengers would bring proofs and miracles 
that none among the creation could ever produce. These 
miracles testified to the truth of Allah’s Messengers. The 
covenant was broken when the disbelievers denied what was 
proven to them to be authentic and rejected Allah’s Prophets 
and Books, although they knew that they were the truth. This 
Tafsir was reported from Muaqatil bin Hayyan, and it is very 
good. It is also the view that Az-Zamakhshari held. 
Allah’s statement next, 


ink Seay Sh GA apis 
<And sever what Allah has ordered to be joined> 


is in reference to keeping the relations with the relatives, as 
Qatadah asserted. This Ayah is similar to Allah’s statement, 


4 BOCS ALES GAT g DLE ot 25 oy cece Jp 
<Would you then, if you were given the authority, do mischief 
in the land, and sever your ties of kinship? (47:22)"! 


Ibn Jarir At-Tabari preferred this opinion. However, it has 
been said that the meaning of the Ayah (2:27) here is more 
general. Hence, everything that Allah has commanded to 
nurture, and the people severed, is included in its meaning. 


The Meaning of ‘Loss’ 
Muagatil bin Hayyan commented on Allah’s statement, 
dE Sil th Bashy 


it is they who are the losers “In the Hereafter."?! Similarly, 
Allah said, 


4 hy Laat Ah Ggilp 
€On them is the curse (i.e. they will be far away from Allah's 
mercy), and for them is the unhappy (evil) home (i.e. Hell)> 
(13:25). 
Also, Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Every 
characteristic that Allah describes those other than the people 
of Islam - such as being losers - then it refers to disbelief. 


() At-Tabari 1:416. 
7) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:101 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 -49) (Part-1) _ 177 


However, when they are attributed to the people of Islam, then 
these terms refer to sin.”!! Ibn Jarir commented on Allah’s 
statement, 


deni oh A> 
It is they who are the losers,> 


“Losers is plural for loser, this word refers to whoever 
decreased his own share of Allah’s mercy by disobeying Him, 
just as the merchant loses in his trade by sustaining capital 
loss. Such is the case with the hypocrite and the disbeliever 
who lose their share of the mercy that Allah has in store for 
His servants on the Day of Resurrection. And that is when the 
disbeliever and the hypocrite most desperately need Allah’s 
mercy. "1 


a t4 ooh obey 9 ta re wet Leh ob, - oe) YW het 44% 
sd pe Rak pt Roast od peas US es ob ys GS > 
S SRST OS 
¢28. How can you disbelieve in Allah seeing that you were 
dead and He gave you life? Then He will give you death, then 


again will bring you to life (on the Day of Resurrection) and 
then unto Him you will return .> 


Allah testifies to the fact that He exists and that He is the 
Creator and the Sustainer Who has full authority over His 
servants, 


4b DSS GS 
¢How can you disbelieve in Allah?> 
How can anyone deny Allah’s existence or worship others 
with Him while; 
€peacsl Gh easy 
€You were dead and He gave you life> meaning, He brought them 
from the state of non-existence to life. Similarly, Allah said, 


Ye SY opctil ie Ame Gast A Oy al > 
Sega? 
0) At-Tabari 1:417. 
2) tid. 


178 Tafsir Ibu Kathir 


«Were they created by nothing? Or were they themselves the 
creators? Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay, 
but they have no firm beliefp (52:35-36) and, 


4 10KE EK AVG Be all SS Sd 
¢Has there not been over man a period of time, when he was 
not a thing worth mentioning?> (76:1). 


There are many other Aydt on this subject. Ibn Jarir 

reported from ‘Ata’ that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 
Gieach ish Lekesd 

<Seeing that you were dead and He gave you life» means, “You did 
not exist beforehand. You were nothing until Allah created you; 
He will bring death to you and then bring you back to life 
during Resurrection.” Ibn ‘Abbas then said, “This is similar to 
Allah’s statement; 


65H CE SB ep 


‘= ¥ 


€They will say: “Our Lord! You have made us to die twice and 
You have given us life twice.’’p (40:11)""! 


cheous 


Pa 2 ct te 2 ae be ne ae, 
& 455 Ii Bi Bee BY gE ST GE all Sad 
Soap © 0% v Coe: $ aee 
qi ae se oy A pet 
429. He it is Who created for you all that is on earth. Then He 


Istawa ila the heaven and made them seven heavens and He is 
the Knower of everything .> 


Evidence of Allah’s Ability 


After Allah mentioned the proofs of His creating them, and 
what they can witness in themselves as proof of that, He 
mentioned another proof that they can witness, that is, the 
creation of the heavens and earth. Allah said, 


Gs 5G Iai Gy ON gE SS GE al 5p 


¢He it is Who created for you all that is on earth, Then He Istawa ila 
the heaven and made them seven heavensp meaning, He turned 


(1) At-Tabari 1:419. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 7 179 


towards the heaven, Sue 
<505-> 


¢And made then> meaning, that He made the heaven, seven 
heavens. Allah said, 


dial HB Bs B5es Ge 

<And made them seven heavens and He is the Knower of everything} 
meaning, His knowledge encompasses all His creation, just as 
He said in another Ayah, 


ote 


43S hy SID 
<Should not He Who has created know?) (67:14). 


The Beginning of the Creation 


This Ayah (2:29) is explained in detail in Strat As-Sajdah 
where Allah said; 


5 HS WS okey os g GH SE oil es ne amy 
& O53 6S BG 13 So oh GS We 
Gl ts OS ES GS iy Os Bet os TK 5 wai é Sages 
Gat Accs 5 wal es ¥ 3 ly my 3 yee ~ Rr SaOve} ees 

450 a ysl Ju aS A 


€Say (O Muhammad 38): ‘Do you verily disbelieve in Him 
Who created the earth in two Days? And you set up rivals (in 
worship) with Him? That is the Lord of all that exists. He 
placed therein (i.e. the earth) firm mountains from above it, and 
He blessed it, and measured therein its sustenance (for its 
dwellers) in four Days equal (i.e. all these four ‘days’ were 
equal in the length of time) for all those who ask (about its 
creation). Then He Istawa ila the heaven when it was smoke, 
and said to it and to the earth: “Come both of you willingly or 
unwillingly.” They both said: “We come willingly.” Then He 
finished them (as) seven heavens in tuo Days and He made in 
each heaven its affair. And We adorned the nearest (lowest) 
heaven with lamps (stars) to be an adornment as well as to 
guard (from the devils by using them as missiles against the 
devils). Such is the decree of the Almighty, the Knower> (41:9- 
12). 


180 __ Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


These Aydt indicate that Allah started creation by creating 
earth, then He made heaven into seven heavens. This is how 
building usually starts, with the lower floors first and then the 
top floors, as the scholars of Tafsir reiterated, as we will come 
to know, Allah willing. Allah also said, 


od Pehe eee 


WES Gh ALG me Kw ie AT J ak Et BID 
Ke ect IdG caus, wt GAL GS as ANG 
di Kay 
Are you more difficult to create or is the heaven that He 
constructed? He raised its height, and has perfected it. Its night 
He covers with darkness and its forenoon He brings out (with 
light). And the earth, after that, He spread it out. And brought 
forth therefrom its water and its pasture. And the mountains 
He has fixed firmly. (To be) a provision and benefit for you and 
your cattle> (79:27-33). 
It is said that “Then” in the Ayah (2:29) relates only to the 
order of reciting the information being given, it does not relate 


to the order that the events being mentioned took place, this 
was reported from Ibn ‘Abbas by ‘Ali bin Abi Talhah.!! 


The Earth was created before Heaven 
Mujahid commented on Allah’s statement, 
46s ENT gE KS GE all 38> 
¢He it is Who created for you all that is on earth> 


“Allah created the earth before heaven, and when He created 
the earth, smoke burst out of it. This is why Allah said, 


ra oes, “ ret 4 
C505 Coy Tl Sy we E> 


4Then He Istawa ila (turned towards) the heaven when it was 
smoke.» (41:11) 


ROSS ES Sead 
¢And made them seven heavens> means, one above the other, 
while the ‘seven earths’ means, one below the other.”!! 


11) At-Tabari 1:437. 
2) At-Tabari 1:436. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 181 


See i ote Ase, 
al) S85) 5 


- 


Be 


4 07 gerd 


Hie dees 
ers 7 Qkale [ieste cle 5 3 
fir < os: y Sis 


Js 
NESE ILS 


“7.7 eS 
b s 


dks mtd 
(ol AIEEE oh, Gel eI 9 


CEG BIG scat sels) KI fal 
(yh oT LINE 55 OD SS ASG GK 
Sp SHS SGC BEL A ASE 
EGE es EA ASD 
ROIS Ege rae POA ONS AB 
CIMA ee C5 2 Fea ot tegpl 


ba 


This Ayah testifies 
to the fact that the 
earth was created 
before heaven, as 
Allah has indicated in 
the Aydt in Surat As- 
Sajdah. 


Spreading the 
Earth out after the 
Heavens were 
created 


Sahih Al-Bukhari 
records that when 
Ibn ‘Abbas was 
question about this 
matter, he said that 
the earth was created 
before heaven, and 
the earth was spread 
out only after the 
creation of the 
heaven.!'! Several 
Tafsir scholars of old 


and recent times also 
said similarly, as we 
have elaborated on in the Tafsir of Strat An-Nazi‘at (chapter 
79). The result of that discussion is that the word Daha 
(translated above as “spread”) is mentioned and explained in 
Allah’s statement, 


ow 


ea Ae! oe Od tll Os a eek Gee ote “oh oe, 
4G) SG ogee, Ga Ge GA eG oh GND 


€And the earth, after that, He spread it out. And brought forth 
therefrom its water and its pasture. And the mountains He has 
fixed firmly.> (79:30-32) 


Therefore, Dahd means that the earth’s treasures were 
brought to its surface after finishing the job of creating 


(1! Fath AL-Bari 8:417. 


182 Tafsir Ibn_Kathir 


whatever will reside on earth and heaven. When the earth 
became Dahd, the water burst out to its surface and the 
various types, colors, shapes and kinds of plants grew. The 
stars started rotating along with the planets that rotate 
around them. And Allah knows best. 
ea LY x ta SAI Ie Gk eg ee Gy Kak = 35> 
GHGS Vu piel dy Jb PBS Sc oo A Hal ay, 
430. And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels: 
“Verily, I am going to place (mankind) generations after 
generations on earth.” They said: “Will You place therein those 
who will make mischief therein and shed blood, — while we 
glorify You with praises and thanks and sanctify You.” He 
(Allah) said: “I know that which you do not know." 


Adam and His Children inhabited the Earth, Generation 
after Generation 


Allah reiterated His favor on the Children of Adam when He 
stated that He mentioned them in the highest of heights before 
He created them. Allah said, 


Ky GS J 35> 
¢And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels.> 


This Ayah means, “O Muhammad #! Mention to your people 
what Allah said to the angels, 


dia iil 4 be ip 
<Verily, I am going to place a Khalifah on earthy. 


Meaning people reproducing generation after generation, 
century after century, just as Allah said, 


4 aN Ge pects all hop 


¢And it is He Who has made you (Khala’if) generations coming 
after generations, replacing each other on the earth (6:165), 
Cig Sah Zies> 
<And makes you (Khulafa’) inheritors of the earth> (27:62), 
dap BM g SS, ud A Shy 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 183 


¢And if it were Our will, We would have (destroyed you 
(mankind all, and) made angels to replace you (Yakhlufiin) on 
the earth.» (43:60) and, 


<Then after them succeeded an (evil) generation (Khalf)> 
(7:169). 


It appears that Allah was not refering to Adam specifically as 
Khalifah, otherwise he would not have allowed the angels’ 
statement, 


agi dass Gea LY x Ya Sadlp 
<Will You place therein those who will make mischief therein 
and shed blood>. 


The angels meant that this type of creature usually commits 
the atrocities they mentioned. The angels knew of this fact, 
according to their understanding of human nature, for Allah 
stated that He would create man from clay. Or, the angels 
understood this fact from the word Khalifah, which also means 
the person who judges disputes that occur between people, 
forbidding them from injustice and sin, as Al-Qurtubi said. 

The statement the angels uttered was not a form of 
disputing with Allah’s, nor out of envy for the Children of 
Adam, as some mistakenly thought. Allah has described them 
as those who do not precede Him in speaking, meaning that 
they do not ask Allah anything without His permission. When 
Allah informed them that He was going to create a creation on 
the earth, and they had knowledge that this creation would 
commit mischief on it, as Qatadah mentioned, they said, 


ei Aas Gs LY ox Gea SazID 
Will You place therein those who will make mischief therein 
and shed blood?> 


This is only a question for the sake of learning about the 
wisdom of that, as if they said, Our Lord! What is the wisdom 
of creating such creatures since they will cause trouble in the 
earth and spill blood? |"! “If the wisdom behind this action is 


I) At-Tabari 1 :464. 


184 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


that You be worshipped, we praise and glorify You (meaning 
we pray to You) we never indulge in mischief, so why create 
other creatures?” 

Allah said to the angels in answer to their inquiry, 


55 Yu el Gd 
<I know that which you do not know.> 


meaning, “I know that the benefit of creating this type of 
creature outweighs the harm that you mentioned, that which 
you have no knowledge of. I will create among them Prophets 
and send Messengers. I will also create among them truthful, 
martyrs, righteous believers, worshippers, the modest, the 
pious, the scholars who implement their knowledge, humble 
people and those who love Allah and follow His Messengers.” 

The Sahih recorded that when the angels ascend to Allah 
with the records of the servant’s deeds, Allah asks them, while 
having better knowledge, “How did you leave My servants?” 
They will say, “We came to them while they were praying and 
left them while they were praying.”'! This is because the 
angels work in shifts with mankind, and they change shifts 
during the Fajr and ‘Asr prayers. The angels who descended 
will remain with us, while the angels who have remained with 
us ascend with our deeds. The Messenger of Allah 3 said, 


CJA JS Ue Jes Ue JS Yo Jae 
‘The deeds of the night are elevated to Allah before the 


morning, and the deeds of the morning before the night 
falls .»|? 


Hence, the angels’ statement, “We came to them while they 
were praying and left them while they were praying,” explains 
Allah’s statement, 


45,55 Yu ciel ap 
<I know that which you do not know.> 
It was said that the meaning of Allah’s statement, 
45s Yu A Sp 
(1) Fath AlL-Bari 13 :426. 
[21 Muslim no. 179, Musnad Abi ‘Awdnah 1:145. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 185 


€I know that which you do not know.> 


is, “I have a specific wisdom in creating them, which you do 
not have knowledge of.” It was also said that it is in answer 
to, 


a JAS> 


<While we glorify You with praises ad thanks and sanctify Youp 
after which Allah said, 


45,55 Yue piel yp 


41 know that which you do not know}. Meaning, “I know that Iblis 
is not as you are, although he is among you.” Others said, 


+ site Few peek behe feet bere io A TS ow, A LOSR 
4h Gis Se AS Ss hal dss ya LL ots Jip 
“qWill You place therein those who will make mischief therein 


and shed blood, — while we glorify you with praises and 
thanks and sanctify You .> 


is their request that they should be allowed to inhabit the 
earth, instead of the Children of Adam. So Allah said to them, 
Kips Vu alel yp 


41 know that which you do not know} if your inhabiting the 
heavens is better, or worse for you.” Ar-Razi as well as others 
said this. Allah knows best. 


45 diss bye 


The Obligation of appointing a Khalifah and some 
related Issues 


Al-Qurtubi, as well as other scholars, said that this Ayah 
(2:30) proves the obligation of appointing a Khalifah to pass 
judgements on matters of dispute between people, to aid the 
oppressed against the oppressor, to implement the Islamic 
penal code and to forbid evil. There are many other tasks that 
can only be fulfilled by appointing the Imam, and what is 
necessary in performing an obligation, is an obligation itself. 
We should state here that Imamah occurs by either naming a 
successor, as a group among Ahi As-Sunnah scholars said 
occurred - by the Prophet # - in the case of Abu Bakr, or 
hinting to a successor. Or, the current Khalifah names a 
certain person as Khalifah after him, as Abu Bakr did with 
‘Umar. Or, the Khalifah might leave the matter in the hands of 


186 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


the Muslim consultative council, or a group of righteous men, 
just as ‘Umar did. Or, the people of authority could gather 
around a certain person to whom they give the pledge of 
allegiance, or they could select one among them to choose the 
candidate, according to the majority of the scholars. 

The Khalifah must be a responsible adult Muslim male, able 
to perform [jtthad (independent legal judgments), bodily able, 
righteous, with knowledge of warfare, politics. He also must be 
from the tribe of Quraysh, according to the correct view, but it 
is not necessary that he be from the tribe of Bani Hashim, or 
that he be immune from error, as the Rafidah (Shiites) falsely 
claim. 

When the Khalifah becomes an immoral person (Fdsiq), 
should he be impeached? There is disagreement over this 
matter, but the correct view is that he is not to be removed, 
because the Messenger of Allah # said, 


CUS ab oil Se pale Ely 5 1555 ST Yp 


tUnless you witness a clear Kufr regarding which you have 
clear proof from Allah .»'") 


Does the Khalifah have the right to resign from his post? 
There is a difference on this issue. It is a fact that Al-Hasan 
bin ‘Ali removed himself from the position of Khalifah and 
surrendered it to Mu‘awiyah. However, this occurred because 
of a necessity, and Al-Hasan was praised for this action. 

It is not permissible to appoint two Imams for the world or 
more at the same time. This is not allowed because the 
Messenger of Allah 2% said, 


CWE 2 BS BG ASS Soe Se Gee pShals Sete te 
«Whoever came to you while you are united and tried to divide 
you, then execute him, no matter who he is.»'?! 

This is the view of the majority of scholars. Imam Al- 
Haramayn stated that Abu Ishaq allowed the appointment of 
two or more Imams when the various provinces are far away 


from each other. However, Imam Al-Haramayn himself was 
indecisive about this view. 


( Al-Bukhari no. 7056, At-Tabari 1:477. 
21 Muslim 3:1470. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 187 


oS of 5 Toh GA Ia ei & ae 2G’ aeVi este. gles 
se J tr 28h pil A ay BL Hy W de S sce WE. cee FOr 
a ai A UE 
A ySS BE a5 Sd © aLels 


431. And He taught Adam all the names (of everything), then 
He showed them to the angels and said, ‘Tell Me the names of 
these if you are truthful.”’> 


432. They (angels) said: “Glory is to You, we have no 
knowledge except what you have taught us. Verily, You are the 
Knower, the Wise.”’> 


433. He said: “O Adam! Inform them of their names,” and 
when he had informed them of their names, He said: “Did I not 
tell you that I know the Ghayb (unseen) in the heavens and the 
earth, and I know what you reveal and what you have been 
concealing?”’> 


The Virtue of Adam over the Angels 


Allah stated the virtue of Adam above the angels, because He 
taught Adam, rather than them, the names of everything. This 
occurred after they prostrated to him. This discussion 
precedes that event here, only to show the importance of his 
position, and the absence of the angels’ knowledge about 
creating the Khalifah when they asked about it. So Allah 
informed the angels that He knows what they do not know, 
and then He mentioned this to show them Adam’s superiority 
over them in knowledge. Allah said, 


cae sot 


eG tei pole esd 


¢And He taught Adam all the names (of everything)>. 
Ad-Dahhak said that ibn Apbas commented on the Ayah; 


¢And He taught Adam all the names (of everything)> 


“Meaning, the names that people use, such as human, animal, 
sky, earth, land, sea, horse, donkey, and so forth, including 
the names of the other species.”'! Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn 


1) At-Tabari 1:458. 


188 ; Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


Jarir reported that ‘Asim bin Kulayb narrated from Sa‘id bin 
Ma‘bad that Ibn ‘Abbas was questioned, 


4G8 TENE pte esp 
¢And He taught Adam all the names (of everything)» 
“Did Allah teach him the names of the plate and the pot?” He 


said, “Yes, and even the terms for breaking wind!”!! 

Allah taught Adam the names of everything, their proper 
names, the names of their characteristics, and what they do, 
just as Ibn ‘Abbas stated about the terms for passing gas. 

In his Sahih, Al-Bukhari explained this Ayah in the Book of 
Tafsir with a report from Anas bin Malik who said that the 
Messenger of Allah # said, 


O85 ail 53s 5 esl taaten J Sy) is tall ¢ ex S sos asth Sou? 


og JB ash tale, sii Gil ieely oy ol Galt Hy ae Aas 
$Sai5 - St Ss) 2035 Suk Oy Cs BS iy ae 
S25 a5 Bl Sy ar Be ts Sf Sp US ar - sed G8 
Jab - cid by Ud Ss diye $45 - Se S58 

wi tds ee gt 2 Ef ering sd SHG ys jus 1g 
be PES EO tl $533 - SUA Lad ks 5538 ube 
25 35 Es ee ee ply a5 
BEG GAG BE Gs Sy Ae GD yg he a i os 

fle fi ek 25 5 SL bp 6 Uy UE Stel 
th oly isl ai gibiy aot iy ‘hs ba Goh; iy sb 


£m. 


wo til 1543 atl 3461 od Sait maleate as oJ 43 Bs33 Ad gal oF acthe ake 


7 Gee 


“4 


usu 32h oF Sen 520 oF Sah ybest dey ie 355 Ad ais ai, - 
eth ao cay Sells YN eg gg w Ob 


tThe believers will gather on the Day of Resurrection and will 
say, ‘We should seek a means of intercession with our Lord’ 
They will go to Adam and say, ‘O Adam! You are the father of 


ay At-Tabari 1:475. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 189 


all mankind, Allah created you with His Own Hand, ordered 
the angels to prostrate for you and taught you the names of 
everything. Will you not intercede for us with your Lord, so 
that he relieve us from this gathering place?’ On that Adam 
will reply, ‘I cannot do what you have asked’. He will have 
remembered his error and will be embarrassed, saying, ‘Go to 
Nuh, for he is the first of Allah’s Messengers whom Allah sent 
to the people of the earth.’ They will go to Nuh and ask him. 
He will say, ‘I cannot do what you have asked.’ He will recall 
asking Allah what he was not to know, and will also be 
embarrassed. He will say, ‘Go to Khalil Ar-Rahmdan.’ They will 
go to Ibrahim and he will also say, ‘I cannot do what you have 
asked.’ He will say, ‘Go to Musa, a servant to whom Allah 
spoke directly and gave the Tawrah.' Misa will say, ‘I cannot 
do what you have asked.’ He will remember that he killed a 
person without justification and will be embarrassed before his 
Lord. He will say, ‘Go to ‘Isa, Allah’s servant and Messenger 
and His Word and a spirit of His."! They will go to ‘Isa and 
he will say, ‘I will not do what you asked. Go to Muhammad, 
a servant whose previous and latter errors were forgiven.’ They 
will come to me, and I will go to Allah and seek His permission 
and He will give me His permission. When I gaze at my Lord, 
I will prostrate myself and Allah will allow me to remain like 
that as much as He will. Then I will be addressed, ‘O 
Muhammad! Raise your head; ask, for you will be given what 
you ask, and intercede, for your intercession will be accepted.’ I 
will raise my head and thank and praise Allah with such praise 
as He will inspire me. I will intercede and He will grant me a 
quantity of people that He will admit into Paradise. I will go 
back to Him, and when I see my Lord, I will intercede and He 
will allow me a quantity that He will admit into Paradise. I 
will do that for a third and then a fourth time. I will say, 
‘There are no more people left in Hell except those whom the 
Qur’an has incarcerated and have thus acquired eternity in 
Hell.’»!?] This Hadith was collected by Muslim, An- 


"1 Anah’s Word and spirit; the meaning here is that Allah created him 
with a word, “Be” and he was, and that he is a spirit from the 
spirits that Allah created, as Ibn Kathir discusses later. 


(21 Fath Al-Bari 8:10. 


190 : Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Nasa‘! and Ibn Majah. 


The reason why we mentioned this Hadith here is the 
Prophet’s statement, 


haley SoG US 5th oy Gr GE 0 FST co JES ait Sf 
sigs is AeA 
«They will go to Adam and say, ‘O Adam! You are the father 
of all mankind, and Allah created you with His Own Hand, 
ordered the angels to prostrate for you, and taught you the 
names of everything»?! 
This part of the Hadith testifies to the fact that Allah taught 


Adam the names of all creatures. 
This is why Allah said, 


oO cht ae eseere 32 
“l rs a 
Seu Se ore ey 


Then He showed them to the angels» meaning, the objects or 
creations. ‘Abdur-Razzaq narrated that Ma‘mar said that 
Qatadah said, “Allah paraded the objects before the angels, 


€igae 2S Sh Toh st Hsp 
And said, ‘Tell Me the names of these if you are 
truthful’’>."9) 
Allah’s statement means, “Tell Me the names of what I 
paraded before you, O angels who said, 


bal AAS Gs Ls ta Jeep 
qWill You place therein those who will make mischief therein 
and shed blood>. 


You asked, ‘Are You appointing a Khalifah from us or from 
other creations? We praise and glorify You. 

Therefore, Allah said, “If you say the truth, that if I appoint 
a non-angel Khalifah on the earth, he and his offspring will 
disobey Me, commit mischief and shed blood, but if I designate 
you the Khalifahs you will obey Me, follow My command and 


11 Muslim 1:181, and An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubré 6 :284. 

2) Muslim 1:181, An-Nasai in Al-Kubraé 6:364, and Ibn Majah 
2:1442. 

{3} ‘Abdur-Razzaq 1:42. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (25 - 49) (Part-1 


honor and glorify Me. However, since you do not know the 
names of the objects I paraded before you, then you have even 
less knowledge of what will occur on the earth that does not 
exist yet.” 


rc ssa nuit Cf Gy Cee oy ke ¥ aoe Wap 


4They (angels) said: “Glory is to You, we have no knowledge 
except what you have taught us. Verily, it is You, the Knower, 
the Wise.’’>. 


Here the angels are praising Allah’s holiness, and perfection 
above every kind of deficiency, affirming that no creature could 
ever acquire any part of Allah’s knowledge, except by His 
permission, nor could anyone know anything except what 
Allah teaches them. This is why they said, 


€.n2 Sai pit Ch By Eee oy We aeezp 


<“Glory is to You, we have no knowledge except what you have 
taught us. Verily You are the Knower, the Wise> 


meaning, Allah is knowledgeable of everything, Most Wise 
about His creation, and He makes the wisest decisions, and 
He teaches and deprives whom He wills from knowledge. 
Verily, Allah’s wisdom and justice in all matters is perfect. 


Adam’s Virtue of Knowledge is demonstrated 
Allah said, 


oi C8 HS oy BS SS al AN OS BA al ps 
<cinets 2 oy ih c cals a 


4He said: “O Adam! Inform them of their names,” and when 
he had informed them of their names, He said: “Did I not tell 
you that I know the Ghayb (unseen) in the heavens and the 
earth, and I know what you reveal and what you have been 
concealing ?’’> 


Zayd bin Aslam said, “You are Jibril, you are Mika’il, you are 
Israfil, until he mentioned the name of the crow.”!"! Mujahid 
said that Allah’s statement, 


1 Tbn Abi Hatim 1:118. 


192 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
rll al (506 JGp 
¢He said: “O Adam! Inform them of their names,’’> 
“The name of the pigeon, the crow and everything.”!!! 
Statements of a similar meaning were reported from Sa‘id bin 
Jubayr, Al-Hasan, and Qatadah.7]_ When Adam’s virtue over 


the angels became apparent, as he mentioned the names that 
Allah taught him, Allah said to the angels, 


45933 BE 5 GEG a BIG oscal CE Ail dy KT aif I> 
<Did I not tell you that I know the Ghayb (unseen) in the 
heavens and the earth, and | know what you reveal and what 
you have been concealing?> 


This means, “Did I not state that 1 know the seen and 
unseen matters.” Similarly, Allah said, 


407 3555 Sat AG sail 2 o> 
¢And if you (O Muhammad 32) speak (the invocation) aloud, 
then verily, He knows the secret and that which is yet more 
hidden> (20:7). 
Also, Allah said about the hoopoe, that it said to Sulayman; 


GAS GS Oe GS BG ogee 9 SOT £2 cal 4 WA Sp 
Cnt abl Boi Ss ey 
<[As Shaytan (Satan) has barred them from Allah's way] so 
they do not prostrate before Allah, Who brings to light what is 
hidden in the heavens and the earth, and knows what you 
conceal and what you reveal. Allah, La ilaha illa Huwa (none 
has the right to be worshipped but He), the Lord of the Supreme 
Throne!> (27:25-26). 
They also have comments other than what we have said 
about the meaning of Allah’s statement, 


459185 BE 5 Yd & oLeb> 
And I know what you reveal and what you have been 
concealing>. 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:119. 
(21 Ibid. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 193 


It is reported from Ad-Dahhak that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 
C58 (EE U5 Skt t eLelG> 


¢And I know what you reveal and what you have been 
concealing> 


means, “I know the secrets, just as I know the apparent 
things, such as, what Iblis concealed in his heart of arrogance 
and pride.”'! Abu Jafar Ar-Razi narrated that Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas said that, 


45S BE 5 GA & oLels> 


¢And I know what you reveal and what you have been 
concealing> 


means, “The apparent part of what they said was: ‘Do you 
create in it that which would commit mischief and shed 
blood?’ The hidden meaning was: ‘We have more knowledge 
and honor than any creation our Lord would create.’ But they 
came to know that Allah favored Adam above them regarding 
knowledge and honor.” 


CRT 5 15 REG I Hay SW A Let Ke gD 
434. And (remember) when We said to the angels: “Prostrate 
yourselves before Adam." And they prostrated except Iblis 


(Shaytan), he refused and was proud and was one of the 
disbelievers (disobedient to Allah).> 


Honoring Adam when the Angels prostrated before Him 


This Ayah mentions the great honor that Allah granted 
Adam, and Allah reminded Adam's offspring of this fact. Allah 
commanded the angels to prostrate before Adam, as this Ayah 
and many Hadiths testify, such as the Hadith about the 
intercession that we discussed. There is a Hadith about the 
supplication of Musa, “O my Lord! Show me Adam who caused 
us and himself to be thrown out of Paradise.” When Masa met 
Adam, he said to him, “Are you Adam whom Allah created 
with His Own Hands, blew life into and commanded the angels 
to prostrate before?”!?! 


(1) at-Tabari 1:498. 
1 Abu Dawud 5:28. 


194 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Iblis was among Those ordered to prostrate before 
Adam, although He was not an Angel 


When Allah commanded the angels to prostrate before Adam, 
Iblis was included in this command. Although Iblis was not an 
angel, he was trying - and pretending - to imitate the angels’ 
behavior and deeds, and this is why he was also included in 
the command to the angels to prostrate before Adam. Satan 
was criticized for defying that command, as we will explain 
with detail, Allah willing, when we mention the Tafsir of Allah’s 
statement, 


Cg BE SS Slt OF dh Spb 


<Except Iblis (Satan). He was one of the Jinn; he disobeyed the 
command of his Lord.> (18:50) 


Similarly, Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas 
said, “Before he undertook the path of sin, Iblis was with the 
angels and was called ‘Azazil.’ He was among the residents of 
the earth and was one of the most active worshippers and 
knowledgeable persons among the angels. This fact caused 
him to be arrogant. Iblis was from a genus called Jinn.”1!! 


The Prostration was before Adam but the Obedience was 
to Allah 


Qatadah commented on Allah’s statement, 
C59 hot Kb Ge ssp 


<And (remember) when We said to the angels: ‘Prostrate 
yourselves before Adam.” 


“The obedience was for Allah and the prostration was before 
Adam. Allah honored Adam and commanded the angels to 
prostrate before him.”!?!_ Some people said that this 
prostration was just a prostration of greeting, peace and 
honor, hence Allah’s statement, 

Wie 5 BS 255 bb oe i 8 ll El ap 
42 55 
") at-Tabari 1:502. 
(21 At-Tabari 1:512. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 195 


<And he (Prophet Yusuf) raised his parents to the throne and 
they fell down before him prostrate. And he said: “O my 
father! This is the interpretation of my dream aforetime! My 
Lord has made it come true!’’> (12:100) 


The practice of prostrating was allowed for previous nations, 
but was repealed for ours. Mu‘adh said to the Prophet 2, “I 
visited Ash-Sham and found that they used to prostate before 
their priests and scholars. You, O Messenger of Allah, are more 
deserving of prostration.” The Prophet 2 said, 


ote Se Gees) Sh St ath SN 3g Gas SI it 2 i ve 


«No. If I was to command any human to prostrate before 
another human, | would command the wife to prostrate before 
her husband because of the enormity of his right on her.»""! 


Ar-Razi agreed with this view. Also, Qatadah said about 
Allah’s statement, 


KKH 5 3G EG of aly Sy GS 


¢And they prostrated except Iblis (Shaytan), he refused and was 
proud and was one of the disbelievers (disobedient to Allah).> 


“Iblis, the enemy of Allah, envied Adam because Allah 
honored Adam. He said, I was created from fire, and he was 
created from clay.’ Therefore, the first error ever committed 
was arrogance, for the enemy of Allah was too arrogant to 
prostrate before Adam.”! I - Ibn Kathir - say, the following is 
recorded in the Sahih, 


«No person who has the weight of a mustard seed of arrogance 
in his heart shall enter Paradise .»!*! 


Iblis had disbelief, arrogance, and rebellion, all of which 
caused him to be expelled from the holy presence of Allah, and 
His mercy. 


1] At-Tirmidhi no.1109, Majma‘ Az-Zaw4a’id 4 :310. 
[21 fbn Abi Hatim 1:123. 
'3) Muslim 1:93. 


196 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Geb ooh Us VG hs Se 168s GE i A BS OF SEI pee ehh> 
Cn pe DE AS BAI 3 KG 5 
435. And We said: “O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the 
Paradise and eat both of you freely with pleasure and delight, of 


things therein wherever you will, but come not near this tree or 
you both will be of the Zalimin (wrongdoers) .’"> 


436. Then the Shaytan made them slip therefrom (the Paradise), 
and got them out from that in which they were. We said: “Get 
you down, all, with enmity between yourselves. On earth will 
be a dwelling place for you and an enjoyment for a time.” 


Adam was honored again 
Allah honored Adam by commanding the angels to prostrate 
before him, so they all complied except for Iblis. Allah then 
allowed Adam to live and eat wherever and whatever he 
wished in Paradise. Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr bin Marduwyah 
reported Abu Dharr saying, “I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Was 
Adam a Prophet?’ He said, 
a Ain tals ¥ 5 OS 
«Yes. He was a Prophet and a Messenger to whom Allah spoke 
directly), meaning 
GE iss EA Kel 
4(O Adam!) Dwell you and your wife in the Paradise.» 


Hawwia’ was created before Adam entered Paradise 
The Ayah (2:35) indicates that Hawwa’ was created before 
Adam entered Paradise, as Muhammad bin Ishaq stated. Ibn 
Ishaq said, “After Allah finished criticizing Iblis, and after 
teaching Adam the names of everything, He said, 
Cigch l KED 
<O Adam! Inform them of their names> until, 


ll) ALAzamah 5:1553. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 197 


€2Sdi pit re Ey > 
€Verily, You are the Knower, the Wise.> 


Then Adam fell asleep, as the People of the Book and other 
scholars such as Ibn ‘Abbas have stated, Allah took one of 
Adam’s left ribs and made flesh grow in its place, while Adam 
was asleep and unaware. Allah then created Adam's wife, 
Hawwa’, from his rib and made her a woman, so that she 
could be a comfort for him. When Adam woke up and saw 
Hawwa’ next to him, it was claimed, he said, ‘My flesh and 
blood, my wife.’ Hence, Adam reclined with Hawwa’. When 
Allah married Adam to Hawwa’ and gave him comfort, Allah 
said to him directly, 


thoes 


GSS Sait yah Oe 5 es Lie 8S ae hs EN aS CA Kur pap 


<’O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the Paradise and eat 
both of you freely with pleasure and delight, of things therein 
wherever you will, but come not near this tree or you both will 
be of the Zalimin (wrongdoers)."’>.”\"! 


Allah tests Adam 
Allah’s statement to Adam, 


Cnt 3h Os VI 
but come not near this treed 


is a test for Adam. There are conflicting opinions over the 
nature of the tree mentioned here. Some said that it was the 
grape tree, barley, date tree, fig tree, and so forth. Some said 
that it was a certain tree, and whoever eats from it will be 
relieved of the call of nature. It was also said that it was a tree 
from which the angels eat so that they live for eternity. Imam 
Abu Ja‘far bin Jarir said, “The correct opinion is that Allah 
forbade Adam and his wife from eating from a certain tree in 
Paradise, but they ate from it. We do not know which tree that 
was, because Allah has not mentioned anything in the Qur’an 
or the authentic Sunnah about the nature of this tree. It was 


Ol At-Tabari 1:514. 


198 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


said that it was barley, grape, or a fig tree. It is possible that it 
was one of those trees. Yet, this is knowledge that does not 
bring any benefit, just as being ignorant in its nature does no 
harm. Allah knows best.”"! This is similar to what Ar-Razi 
stated in his Tafsir, and this is the correct opinion. 

Allah’s statement, 


dz Bh eas 
€Then the Shaytan made them slip therefrom> 


either refers to Paradise, and in this case, it means that 
Shaytdn led Adam and Hawwa’ away from it, as ‘Asim bin Abi 
An-Najud recited it.! It is also possible that this Ayah refers 
to the forbidden tree. In this case, the Ayah would mean, as 
Al-Hasan and Qatddah stated, “He tripped them.”°! In this 
case, 


sera 
<Then the Shaytan made them slip therefrom> 
means, “Because of the tree”, just as Allah said, 
<Turned aside therefrom (i.e. from Muhammad 3% and the 


Qur'an) is he who is turned aside (by the decree and 
preordainment of Allah) (51:9) 


meaning, the deviant person becomes turned aside - or slips - 
from the truth because of so and so reason. This is why then 
Allah said, 
5 6 > 
And got them out from that in which they were> 


meaning, the clothes, spacious dwelling and comfortable 
sustenance. 


4 
Kier St G5 FE BN Ss 555 oath Ke hat Gp 


(1 At-Tabari 1:520. 
[2] thn Abi Hatim 1:128. 
(3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:128, 129. 


Sdrahi 2. Al-Bagqarah (25 - 49) (Part-1 199 


4We said: “Get you down, all, with enmity between 
yourselves. On earth will be a dwelling place for you and an 
enjoyment for a time .”’> 


meaning, dwelling, sustenance and limited life, until the 
commencement of the Day of Resurrection 


Adam was very Tall 


Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that Ubayy bin Ka‘b said that the 
Messenger of Allah 3 said, 


GB UB GAs HE SE ln 23 pas Vigh 5 657 She a Sp 
1h jhe aye yf GA UB oye So 5b eg Se ee 
Gb te biG Sb GIG Bat et Lieb Eel 3 

Bl oS, V5 EIU pe Oe a 
‘Allah created Adam tall, with thick hair, just as a date tree 
with full branches. When Adam ate from the forbidden tree, his 
cover fell off, and the first thing that appeared was his private 
area. When he saw his private area, he ran away in Paradise 
and his hair got caught in a tree. He tried to free himself and 
Ar-Rahman called him, ‘O Adam! Are you running away from 


Me?’ When Adam heard the words of Ar-Rahman (Allah), he 
said, ‘No, O my Lord! But I am shy.’0!"! 


Adam remained in Paradise for an Hour 


Al-Hakim recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Adam was allowed 
to reside in Paradise during the time period between the ‘Asr 
(Afternoon) prayer, until sunset.” Al-Hakim then commented 
this is “Sahih according to the Two Shaykhs (Al-Bukhari and 
Muslim), but they did not include it in their collections.”*! 
Also, Ibn Abi Hatim recorded Ibn ‘Abbas saying, “Allah sent 
Adam to earth to an area called, Dahna, between Makkah and 
At-Ta'if."3! Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that Adam was sent down 
to India, while Hawwa’ was sent to Jeddah. Iblis was sent 
down to Dustumaysan, several miles from Basra. Further, the 


I" Ibn Abi Hatim 1:129. 
(21 Al-Hakim 2 :542. 
(3) thn Abi Hatim 1:131. 


200 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


snake was sent down to Asbahdn. This was reported by Ibn 
Abi Hatim.!! Also, Muslim and An-Nasa’i recorded that Abu 
Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah # said, 


EAT ass Sah Jesh as isi Gt a AA Ay Lr gg Sal yg ee 

ces 
‘Friday is the best day on which the sun has risen. On Friday, 
Allah created Adam, admitted him into Paradise, and expelled 
him from it.»!?! 


A Doubt and a Rebuttal 


If one asks, “If the Paradise that Adam was thrown out of 
was in heaven, as the majority of the scholars assert, then is 
it possible for Iblis to enter Paradise, although he was expelled 
from it by Allah’s decision (when he refused to prostrate before 
Adam)?” 

Basically, the response to this would be that the Paradise 
which Adam was in, was in the heavens, not on the earth, as 
we explained in the beginning of our book Al-Biddyah wan- 
Nihdyah. 

The majority of scholars said that Shaytdn was originally 
prohibited from entering Paradise, but there were times when 
he sneaked into it in secret. For instance, the Tawrah stated 
that Iblis hid inside the snake’s mouth and entered Paradise. 
Some scholars said that it is possible that Shaytan led Adam 
and Hawwa’ astray on his way out of Paradise. Some scholars 
said that he led Adam and Hawwa’ astray when he was on 
earth, while they were still in heaven, as stated by Az- 
Zamakhshari. Al-Qurtubi mentioned several beneficial Hadiths 
here about snakes and the ruling on killing them. 

eed AM By EOE ok 1S op fale Si 
437. Then Adam received from his Lord Words. And his Lord 
pardoned him (accepted his repentance). Verily, He is the One 
Who forgives (accepts repentance), the Most Merciful.> 


(1 thn Abi Hatim 1:132. 
2) Muslim 2:585 , and An-Nasa’i 3:90. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 201 


Adam repents and supplicates to Allah 
It was reported that the above Ayah is explained by Allah’s 
statement, 
CH SSI be FSS C5 GAB J op CA UE GS Yep 


ont 


€37. They said: “Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If 
You forgive us not, and bestow not upon us Your mercy, we 
shall certainly be of the losers.” (7:23) 


as Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Muhammad bin Ka‘b Al-Qurazi, 
Khalid bin Ma‘dan, ‘Ata’ Al-Khuradsani and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin 
Zayd bin Aslam have stated.''! As-Suddi said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
commented on, 


4K oS oe 155 Gp 
4Then Adam received from his Lord Words» 


“Adam said, ‘O Lord! Did You not created me with Your Own 
Hands?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘And blow life into me?’ He 
said, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘And when I sneezed, You said, ‘May Allah 
grant you His mercy.’ Does not Your mercy precede Your 
anger?’ He was told, ‘Yes.’ Adam said, ‘And You destined me to 
commit this evil act?’ He was told, ‘Yes.’ He said, If I repent, 
will You send me back to Paradise?’ Allah said, ‘Yes.’”!?! 
Similar is reported from Al-‘Awfi, Said bin Jubayr, Sa‘id bin 
Ma‘bad, and Ibn ‘Abbas.'*! Al-Hakim recorded this Hadith in 
his Mustadrak*) from Ibn Jubayr, who narrated it from Ibn 
‘Abbas. Al-Hakim said, “Its chain is Sahih and they (Al- 
Bukhari and Muslim) did not record it.” 
Allah’s statement, 


ee)! 26 3b ID 
<Verily, He is the One Who forgives (accepts repentance), the Most 
Merciful (2:37) 
means that Allah forgives whoever regrets his error and 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:136 and At-Tabari 1:543, 546. 
2] at-Tabari 1:543: 

(31 At-Tabari 1:542. 

4] 9-545. 


202 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
IED v Ose returns to Him in 
2679 ne ce bee Pcie cr 14 eect | repentance. This 
“yo GAS ns bGGhesC \ybasil ; Coe 
trots Geen. ire s pi meaning is similar to 
Sead 3b FAY eles >b.G148 || Allah’s statements, 
Sy 7 2\r. Ae oe a he, vy 2338S Bese rd te wor Ae 
Mowry cA AA st 5G | Ie A aD HS Alp 
we ok FL don, Cnt Se, oe bnew 2 Sus aod 4¢eoy° 
aml eles wlesleos IPSS hevckes disse % Op 
Ne ea v7 BEX $9 oo 7 or .4 
URIS B otebes Samad || ¢Know they not that 
ee tite Ae be eithted be crede- ce. , || Allah accepts repentance 
BELAY 4 pbs SEK SAA RU from His _ servants> 
‘J Loi, Ssui 4 ENS ‘Oo ab 51 SLES (9:104), 
Pesala GO SAS EG SIS; | we Tee de 
ASOT @ GASES tit 
6D Slusselcss Highs als STS a 4And whoever does evil 
Cx wise or wrongs  himself> 


s peste o Be Soe oe Ze A ated “et, 
este Ver a AB A153 Hl (4-110) and 


4 


REPUTE be pean Fe ped RA Soe | nee lentes 
Qariclerlingle ee | gue 55 ce ay 
oles als pele ale igalysii bev ¢And whosoever repents 
Foete 15,7 BIS PE a sect ates atm «zee || and does righteous good 
Yoke th oe GAY eplyests CORN Ue deeds sri g 

Pa oF Ae ope feos 47D poe Pr 7e. 2 4 
Bajar dicynseyy Is aablt ( The Aydt mentioned 
above, testify to the 
fact that Allah forgives the sins of whoever repents, 
demonstrating His kindness and mercy towards His creation 
and servants. There is no deity worthy of worship except Allah, 
the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful. 


a oe SS Bae G3 6k Y Kok oe Le ee thar cp 
438. We said: “Get down all of you from this place (the 
Paradise), then whenever there comes to you Hudan (guidance) 


from Me, and whoever follows My guidance, there shall be no 
fear on them, nor shall they grieve.> 
439. But those who disbelieve and belie Our Aydt (proofs, 


evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) — such are 
the dwellers of the Fire. They shall abide therein forever .”’> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagaralt (25 - 49) (Part-1 203 


Allah stated that when He sent Adam, Hawwa’, and Shaytan 
to earth from Paradise, He warned them that He will reveal 
Books and send Prophets and Messengers to them, i.e., to 
their offspring. Abu Al-‘Aliyah said, “Al-Hudd, refers to the 
Prophets, Messengers, the clear signs and plain 
explanation." 


40h fd 
¢And whoever follows My guidance> meaning, whoever accepts 
what is contained in My Books and what I send the Messengers 
with, 
€pyle GH Sap 
<There shall be no fear on them> regarding the Hereafter, 
CF 19 
4nor shall they grieve> regarding the life of this world. Similarly, 
in Surat Ta Ha, Allah said, : 
¢He (Allah) said: “Get you down (from the Paradise to the 
earth), both of you, together, some of you are an enemy to some 
others. Then if there comes to you guidance from Me, then 


whoever follows My guidance, he shall neither go astray, nor 
shall he be distressed .> (20:123) 


Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “He will not be misguided in this life 
or miserable in the Hereafter.”!?! The Ayah, 


dca acca 53 BAS Ks a A des & BS 
<But whosoever turns away from My Reminder (i.e. neither believes 
in this Qur'an nor acts on its teachings) verily, for him is a life of 
hardship, and We shall raise him up blind on the Day of 
Resurrection.» (20:124) is similar to what Allah stated here, 


oe Me 


ANS dat ace Se pet wk oa th bee 8 tte 9 oe, 
€RoStys Yo oh Ol Ll ASS Ge bs Ls Baty 


1) tbn Abi Hatim 1:139. 
[2] At-Tabari 18 :389. 


204 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<But those who disbelieve and belie Our Ayit — such are the 
dwellers of the Fire. They shall abide therein forever», meaning, they 
will remain in Hell for eternity and will not find a way out of it. 


ates 235 Se ol we Bib Ke SA it os USN ery sp 
TO ae WES 4 OF DOGG ke tie UST & pans 
CoE 255 
¢40. O Children of Israel! Remember My favor which I 
bestowed upon you, and fulfill (your obligations to) My 
covenant (with you) so that I fulfill (My obligations to) your 
covenant (with Me), and fear none but Me.> 
€41. And believe in what I have sent down (this Qur’an), 
confirming that which is with you (the Tawrah and the Injil), 
and be not the first to disbelieve therein, and buy not with My 


verses (the Tawrah and the Injil) a small price (i.e. getting a 
small gain by selling My verses), and fear Me and Me alone.> 


Encouraging the Children of Israel to embrace Islam 


Allah commanded the Children of Israel to embrace Islam 
and to follow Muhammad #%. He also reminded them with the 
example of their father Israel, Allah’s Prophet Ya‘qab, as if 
saying, “O children of the pious, righteous servant of Allah who 
obeyed Allah! Be like your father, following the truth.” This 
statement is similar to one’s saying, “O you son of that 
generous man! Do this or that” or, “O son of the brave man, 
engage the strong fighters,” or “O son of the scholar, seek the 
knowledge,” and so forth. Similarly, Allah said, 


COKE ME OE BL op GS & 
<0 offspring of those whom We carried (in the ship) with Nuh 
(Noah)! Verily, he was a grateful servant} (17:3). 


Israel is Prophet Ya‘qiib (Jacob) 


Israel is Prophet Ya‘qub, for Abu Dawud At-Taydlisi recorded 
that ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas said, “A group of Jews came to the 
Prophet # and he said to them, 


OB Jato] OV OAL Jos 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 205 
«Do you know that Israel is Jacob?» They said, “Yes, by Allah.” 
He said, 
av eauie 
«O Allah! Be witness .0”""! 


At-Tabari recorded that ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas said that 
‘Israel’ means, ‘the servant of Allah. ’! 


Allah’s Blessings for the Children of Israel 

Allah said, 

4H EA il os USI 
€Remember My favor which I bestowed upon you>. 

Mujahid commented, “Allah’s favor that He granted the Jews 
is that He made water gush from stones, sent down manna 
and quails for them, and saved them from being enslaved by 
Pharaoh.”*! Abu Al-‘Aliyah also said, “Allah’s favor mentioned 
here is His sending Prophets and Messengers among them, 


and revealing Books to them.”*! I - Ibn Kathir - say that this 
Ayah is similar to what Musa said to the Children of Israel, 


oe fas ayer CI8 bee ee se GE he nee 9 been Se cee tee ote 
oS FE Keaics OE ices gl Ma Sy Ske ail es 15 25s> 
igdcit 53 OC 
€O my people! Remember the favor of Allah to you : when He made 


Prophets among you, made you kings, and gave you what He had 
not given to any other among the nations (of their time} (5:20) 


meaning, during their time. Also, Muhammad bin Ishaq said 
that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
€KE EA ol os UD 
€Remember My favor which I bestowed upon you,> 


means, “My support for you and your fathers,” that is saving 
them from Pharaoh and his people. 


(') Musnad At-Taydlisi no. 356. 
21 At-Tabari 1:553. 

(31 at-Tabari 1:556 

41 Ibid. 


206 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Reminding the Children of Israel of Allah’s Covenant 
with Them 


Allah’s statement, 
450 asl OWES 
<And fulfill (your obligations to) My covenant (with you) so 
that I fulfill (My obligations to) your covenant (with Me),> 


means, ‘My covenant that I took from you concerning Prophet 
Muhammad 3, when he is sent to you, so that I grant you 
what I promised you if you believe in him and follow him. I will 
then remove the chains and restrictions that were placed 
around your necks, because of the errors that you 
committed.”"! Also, Al-Hasan Al-Basri!?! said, “The ‘covenant’ 
is in reference to Allah’s statement, 
Sh MSGS Cas Fee GH LA ONS hy mgt She Oa ST Aap 
ih aa hiss yt) Lins Gea phan; tfat AST 3s pee 
420 GS 68 5k BN, RBar Ke Hel is 5 
<Indeed, Allah took the covenant from the Children of Israel 
(Jews), and We appointed twelve leaders among them. And 
Allah said: “I am with you if you perform As-Salah and give 
Zakah and believe in My Messengers; honor and assist them, 
and lend a good loan to Allah, verily, I will expiate your sins 
and admit you to Gardens under which rivers flow (in 
Paradise)> (5:12).” 


Other scholars said, “The covenant is what Allah took from 
them in the Tawrah, in that, He will send a great Prophet - 
meaning Muhammad 3 - from among the offspring of Isma‘l, 
who will be obeyed by all peoples. Therefore, whoever obeys 
him, then Allah will forgive his sins, enter him into Paradise 
and award him two rewards.” We should mention here that Ar- 
Razi mentioned several cases of information brought by the 
earlier Prophets regarding the coming of Muhammad %. 
Further, Abu Al-‘Aliyah said that, 


dcoayy 55> 
() At-Tabari 1:555 & 557. 
(21 At-Tabari 1:109. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 207 


¢And fulfill (your obligations to) My covenant (with you)> 


means, “His covenant with His servants is to embrace Islam 

and to adhere to it.”"! Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 

“ fulfill My obligations to you’ means, 1 (Allah) will be pleased 

with you and admit you into Paradise.’”*! As-Suddi, Ad- 

Dahhak, Abu Al-‘Aliyah and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said similarly. 
Ibn ‘Abbas said that Allah’s statement, 


CSRS 2 
¢And fear Me and Me alone.> 


means, “Fear the torment that I might exert on you, just as | 
did with your fathers, like the mutation, etc.”%! This Ayah 
contains encouragement, followed by warning. Allah first called 
the Children of Israel, using encouragement, then He warned 
them, so that they might return to the Truth, follow the 
Messenger #4, heed the Qur’an’s prohibitions and commands 
and believe in its content. Surely, Allah guides whom He wills 
to the straight path. 
Allah said next, 


ike ict LN ty ipansp 


<And believe in what I have sent down, confirming that which 
is with you (the Tawrah and the Injil)> 


meaning, the Qur’4n that Allah sent down to Muhammad 4, 
the unlettered Arab Prophet, as bringer of glad tidings, a 
warner and a light. The Qur'an contains the Truth from Allah 
and affirms what was revealed beforehand in the Tawrah and 
the Injil (the Gospel). Abu Al-‘Aliyah said that Allah’s statement, 


4k Sit I ies 
4And believe in what I have sent down (this Qur’an), 
confirming that which is with you (the Tawrah and the Injil)> 
“means, ‘O People of the Book! Believe in what I sent down 


that conforms to what you have.’ This is because they find the 
description of Muhammad 3 recorded in the Tawrah and the 


(1) At-Tabari 1:558. 
21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:143. 
[3] thn Abi Hatim 1:144. 


208 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Injil.” Similar statements were attributed to Mujahid, Ar-Rabi‘ 
_ bin Anas and Qatadah.!"! 
Allah said, 


45 36 BGK Sp 
¢and be not the first to disbelieve therein}. 


Ibn ‘Abbaés commented, “Do not become the first to disbelieve 
in the Qur’én (or Muhammad 3), while you have more 
knowledge in it than other people.”!?!| Abu Al-‘Aliyah 
commented, “Do not become the first to disbelieve in 
Muhammad,’ meaning from among the People of the Book, 
‘after you hear that he was sent as a Prophet.”!9) Similar 
statements were attributed to Al-Hasan, As-Suddi and Ar-Rabi‘ 
bin Anas."! Ibn Jarir stated that the Ayah (disbelieve therein 
2:41) refers to the Qur’an, mentioned earlier in the Ayah, 


pre fe 


4215) GD 
€in what I have sent down (this Qur'an),> 


Both statements are correct because they are inter-related. 
For instance, whoever disbelieves in the Qur’an will have 
disbelieved in Muhammad #%, and whoever disbelieves in 
Muhammad # will have disbelieved in the Qur’an. Allah’s 
statement, 


<4 6 Dp 
<the first to disbelieve therein} 


means, do not become the first among the Children of Israel to 
disbelieve in it, for there were people from Quraysh and the 
Arabs in general who rejected Muhammad 3 before the People 
of the Book disbelieved in him. We should state here that the 
Ayah is talking about the Children of Israel in specific, because 
the Jews in Al-Madinah were the first among the Children of 
Israel to be addressed by the Qur’an. Hence, their disbelief in 
the Qur’én means that they were the first armong the People of 
the Book to disbelieve in it. 


(1) Tbn Abi Hatim 1:145. 
(2) Ibid. 
IS} bid. 
[4] Ibid. 


Siirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 209 
Allah’s statement, 
<and buy not with My verses a small price,> 


means, “Do not substitute faith in My Aydt and belief in My 
Prophet with the life of this world and its lusts which are 
minute and bound to end.” Allah said, 


asst 85> 
¢and have Taqwa of Me and Me alone>. 

Ibn Abi Hatim reported that Talq bin Habib said, “Taqwa is 
to work in Allah’s obedience, on a light from Allah, hoping in 
Allah’s mercy, and to avoid Allah’s disobedience, on a light 
from Allah, fearing Allah’s punishment.”'! Allah’s statement, 


a8 Cyd 
¢and fear Me and Me alone> 


means, that Allah warns the People of the Book against 
intentionally hiding the truth and spreading the opposite of it, 
as well as, against defying the Messenger 3%. 


Soi iihs lat Ys as AG Sit SS uh SA Lu 5p 

4 S89 © SS, 
442. And mix not truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth 
while you know (the truth).> 


443. And perform As-Salah, and give Zakah, and bow down 
along with Ar-Raki‘in.> 


The Prohibition of hiding the Truth and distorting It 
with Falsehood 


Allah forbade the Jews from intentionally distorting the truth 
with falsehood and from hiding the truth and spreading 
falsehood, 


edad 


Cass BG Sit RS ull, SAT LAE op 


€And mix not truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth while 


OV tpid. 12147. 


210 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
you know (the truth)>. 


So Allah forbade them from two things; He ordered them to 
make the truth known, as well as explaining it. Ad-Dahhak 
said that Ibn ‘Abbas mentioned the Ayah, 


<ul, Sait Lub 5p 
¢And mix not truth with falsehood> and said; “Do not mix the 


truth with falsehood and the facts with lies.”"! Qatadah said 
that, 


<yucil Sui 8 Y5> 


<And mix not truth with falsehood} means, “Do not mix Judaism 
and Christianity with Islam, 


455485 BG> 
while you know (the truth).> 


that the religion of Allah is Islam, and that Judaism and 
Christianity are innovations that did not come from Allah.”?! 
It was reported that Al-Hasan Al-Basri said similarly.'*! 

Also, Muhammad bin Ishaq narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said 
that, 


igh EG Sit LSS 
¢nor conceal the truth while you know (the truth) .> 

means, “Do not hide the knowledge that you have of My 
Messenger and what he was sent with. His description, which you 
know about, can be found written in the Books that you have.”"*! 

It is possible that it means, ‘..although you know the 
tremendous harm that this evil will cause people, misguiding 
them and leading them to the Fire, because they will follow 
the falsehood that you mixed with the truth in your claims.” 


41D S591 © AGG Ki hs Slat U.sh> 
<And perform As-Salat and give Zakah, and bow down along 
with Ar-Raki‘in.> 
0) At-Tabari 1:569. 
2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:147. 
{3} tid. 
(4] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:148. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 211 
Mudatil said, “Allah’s statement to the People of the Book, 
disiai 23> 
¢And perform As-Salahy commands them to perform the prayer 
behind the Prophet 34, 


EES esd 


dand give Zakah> commands them to pay the Zakdh to the 
Prophet 2%, and 


45591 ELD 


¢and bow down along with Ar-Raki‘iny commands them to bow 
down with those who bow down among the Ummah of 
Muhammad 3. Allah therefore commands the People of the 
Book to be with, and among the Ummah of Muhammad jae 1 
In addition, Allah’s statement, 


4559 ELD 
¢And bow down along with Ar-Raki‘iny means, “And be among 
the believers performing the best deeds they perform, such as, 
and foremost, the prayer.” Many scholars said that this Ayah 
(2:43) is proof for the obligation of performing the prayer in 


congregation (for men only). I will explain this ruling in detail in 
Kitab Al-Ahkam Al-Kabir, Allah willing. 


Coe Sas Sel COSI Sh BG AN Sats A at Gly 
444. Enjoin you Al-Birr (piety and righteousness and every act 
of obedience to Allah) on the people and you forget (to practise 


it) yourselves, while you recite the Scripture (Tawrah))! Have 
you then no sense?> 


The Condemnation of commanding Others to observe 
Righteousness while ignoring Righteousness 

Allah said, “How is it, O People of the Book, that you 
command people to perform Al-Birr, which encompasses all 
types of righteousness, yet forget yourselves and do not heed 
what you call others to? And you read Allah’s Book (the 


UW ALKashaf 1:133. 


212 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Tawrah) and know what it promises to those who do not fulfill 
Allah’s commandments. 


5345 Sul> 
Have you then no sense? 
of what you are doing to yourselves, so that you might become 
aware of your slumber and restore your sight from blindness?” 


‘Abdur-Razzaq said that Ma‘mar stated that Qatadah 
commented on Allah’s statement, 


4K 55 ah ABI tly 
<€Enjoin you Al-Birr (piety and righteousness and every act of 


obedience to Allah) on the people and you forget (to practise it) 
yourselves ,> 


“The Children of Israel used to command people to obey Allah, 
fear Him and perform AlI-Birr. Yet, they contradicted these 
orders, so Allah reminded them of this fact.”!!! As-Suddi said 
similarly. Ibn Jurayj said that the Ayah: 


€lk ai ally 

<Enjoin you Al-Birr on the people» “Is about the People of the 
Book and the hypocrites. They used to command people to pray 
and fast. However, they did not practice what they commanded 
others. Allah reminded them of this behavior. So whoever 
commands people to do righteousness, let him be among the 
first of them to implement that command.”?! Also, Muhammad 
bin Ishaq narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


Gail 55385 
€And you forget yourselves ,> 
means, “You forget to practice it yourselves, 


“t 


46a SI Losi 585 ap 
<While you recite the Scripture (Tawrah)! Have you then no 
sense?> 
You forbid the people from rejecting the prophethood and the 


1) ‘Abdur-Razzaq 1:44. 
12) At-Tabari 2:8. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 213 


covenant that you have mentioned with you in the Tawrah, 
while you yourselves have forgoten it, meaning that ‘you have 
forgotten the covenant that I made with you that you will 
accept My Messenger. You have breeched My covenant, and 
rejected what you know is in My Book.’ 1"! 


Therefore, Allah admonished the Jews for this behavior and 
alerted them to the wrongs that they were perpetrating against 
themselves by ordering righteousness, yet refraining 
themselves from righteousness. We should state that Allah is 
not criticizing the People of the Book for ordering 
righteousness, because enjoining good is a part of 
righteousness and is an obligation for the scholars. However, 
the scholar is himself required to heed, and adhere to, what 
he invites others to. For instance, Prophet Shu‘ayb said, 


o §, aoee we tune oS Sep rte 4. Bre ch oh 8 ‘ve 
ais WS Cchet u chat Vy LS ay ee eal th Kat Fal 
ded by 2% & Bh 


€I wish not, in contradiction to you, to do that which I forbid 
you. I only desire reform to the best of my power. And my 
guidance cannot come except from Allah, in Him I trust and 
unto Him I repent> (11:88). 


Therefore, enjoining righteousness and performing 
righteousness are both required. Neither category is rendered 
not necessary by the practice of the other, according to the 
most correct view of the scholars among the Salaf 
(predecessors) and the Khalaf.!?! 


Imam Ahmad reported that Abu Wa’il said, “While I was 
riding behind Usaémah, he was asked, ‘Why not advise 
‘Uthman?’ He said, ‘Do you think that if I advise him I should 
allow you to hear it? I advise him in secret, and IJ will not start 
something that I would hate to be the first to start. I will not 
say to a man, ‘You are the best man,’ even if he was my 
leader, after what I heard from the Messenger of Allah 3.’ 
They said, ‘What did he say?’ He said, I heard him say, 

") At-Tabari 2:7. 
21 The scholars who came after the first three generations of Islam. 


214 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
3 oii canal v ob & op i5 ON Bly Cabs sey Slog 554: 
i V5 Grady SF 28 ys oS os gs, Gey, UE 

tals Fc] # Stel; 
tA man will be brought on the Day of Resurrection and thrown 
in the Fire. His intestines will fall out and he will continue 
circling pulling them behind him, just as the donkey goes 
around the pole. The people of the Fire will go to that man and 
ask him, ‘What happened to you? Did you not used to 
command us to do righteous acts and forbid us from committing 
evil?’ He will say, ‘Yes. I used to enjoin righteousness, but 
refrained from performing righteousness, and I used to forbid 
you to perform from evil while I myself did it.’».’” 

This Hadith was also recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim!) 


Also, Ibrahim An-Nakhai said, “I hesitate in advising people 
because of three Aydt: 


GK S585 ih Aa allp 
¢Enjoin you Al-Birr on the people and you forget (to practise it) 
yourselves>. 
CSE da ae Cs Hl GE I OE Uh al ley 
es ct 
<O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not 


do? Most hateful it is to Allah that you say that which you do 
not do} (61:2-3).”1 


And Allah informed us ea the Prophet Shu‘ayb said, 
ey GS eet & t paayi Ji ol tes hr ras tH Kath A 4a 65> 
ded oly E85 ake AY 
<I wish not, in contradiction to you, to do that which I forbid 
you. I only desire reform to the best of my power. And my 


guidance cannot come except from Allah, in Him I trust and 
unto Him I repent} (11:88). 


(1 Fath Al-Bari 6:381 and Muslim 4 :2291, Ahmad 5:205. 
[21 Al-Qurtubi 1:367. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1 215 


reo tall El a fus all oad yy ES as blab sot Lip 
4205 oS eb 

€45. And seek help in patience and As-Salat (the prayer) and 

truly, it is extremely heavy and hard except for Al-Khashi‘in .> 


446 (They are those) who are certain that they are going to 
meet their Lord, and that unto Him they are going to return.> 


The Support that comes with Patience and Prayer 


Allah commanded His servants to use patience and prayer to 
acquire the good of this life and the Hereafter. Muqatil bin 
Hayyan said that this Ayah means, “Utilize patience and the 
obligatory prayer in seeking the Hereafter. As for patience 
(here), they say that it means fasting.”') There are similar 
texts reported from Mujahid. Al-Qurtubi and other scholars 
commented, “This is why Ramadan is called the month of 
patience,”'?!_ as is mentioned in the Hadith literature. It was 
also said that ‘patience’ in the Ayah means, refraining from 
evil, and this is why ‘patience’ was mentioned along with 
practicing acts of worship, especially and foremost, the prayer. 
Also, Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab said, 
“There are two types of patience: good patience when the 
disaster strikes, and a better patience while avoiding the 
prohibitions of Allah.” Ibn Abi Hatim said that Al-Hasan Al- 
Basri was reported to have said similarly.!*! 

Allah then said, 


E35 
€And As-Saldh (the prayer) .> 


The prayer is one of the best means of assistance for firmly 
adhering to Allah’s orders, just as Allah said; 


eres teed oo se Pr ee Pig og hes dee 
Kes 3 (AS Et ey BT ST SG Gl Lip 
diel bt 355) (Ki; 
1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:154. 


21 al-Qurtubi 1:372 
'3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:155. 


216 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€Recite (O Muhammad #) what has been revealed to you of the 
Book (the Qur’in), and perform As-Salah. Verily, As-Salah (the 
a’ (i.e. great sins of every kind), 


prayer) prevents from Al-Fahsha 
and Al-Munkar and the remembrance of (praising) of (you by) 
Allah is greater indeed (29:45). 


The personal pronoun in the Ayah, 
E55 Gap 
¢And truly, it is extremely heavy and hardp 


refers to prayer, as Mujahid is reported to have said, and it 
was also the choice of Ibn Jarir. It is possible that the 
pronoun might be referring to the advice - to observe patience 
and the prayer - mentioned in the same Ayah. Similarly, Allah 
said about Qariin (Korah), 
CEG Os his it A AG eas AI ol Sects 
Ca5b.jca0 J 
<But those who had been given (religious) knowledge said: 
“Woe to you! The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is better 
for those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and this, 
none shall attain except As-Sabiriin (the patient) ."’> (28:80). 
Also, Allah said, 
Me BS tas et oll Of Sh Sh Gs EG KI ges 
<The good deed and the evil deed cannot be equal. Repel (the 
evil) with one which is better then verily he, between whom and 
you there was enmity, (will become) as though he was a close 
friend. But none is granted it (the above quality) except those 
who are patient — and none is granted it except the owner of 
the great portion (of happiness in the Hereafter and) in this 
world .> (41:34-35) 


meaning, this advice is only implemented by those who are 
patient and the fortunate. In any case, Allah’s statement here 
means, prayer is ‘heavy and burdensome’, 


€ fags J Yp 
€except for Al-Khashi‘in .> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 217 


Ibn Abi Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on this 
Ayah, “They (Al-Khdshi‘n) are those who believe in what Allah 
has revealed.”!!! 

Allah’s statement, 


CoG oH FG age Gal AE fs galt> 

<They are those who are certain that they are going to meet 

their Lord, and that unto Him they are going to return.> 
continues the subject that was started in the previous Ayah. 
Therefore, the prayer, or the advice to observe it is heavy, 

Cin oes Walt ade gall cecal fe yp 

¢except for Al-Khashi‘in. (They are those) who are certain 

(Yazunnina) that they are going to meet their Lord,> 
meaning, they know that they will be gathered and face their 
Lord on the Day of Resurrection, 

Cine ch pels> 
¢and that unto Him they are going to return.> 


meaning, their affairs are all subject to His will and He justly 
decides what He wills. Since they are certain that they will be 
returned to Allah and be reckoned, it is easy for them to 
perform the acts of obedience and refrain from the 
prohibitions. Ibn Jarir commented on Allah’s statement; 


res belt al Sts 
€Yazunniina that they are going to meet their Lord» 

Ibn Jarir said; “The Arabs call certainty as well as doubt, 
Zann. There are similar instances in the Arabic language 
where a subject as well as its opposite share the same name. 
For instance, Allah said, 

Casals el 5G 3p. 225 123 
€And the Mujrimiin (criminals, polytheists, sinners), shall see 
the Fire and Zannii (apprehend) that they have to fall 
therein>”(18:53). 

It is recorded in the Sahih that on the Day of Resurrection, 


OM) At-Tabari 2:16. 


218 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah will say to a servant, “Have I not allowed you to marry, 
honored you, made the horses and camels subservient to you 
and allowed you to become a chief and a master?” He will say, 
“Yes.” Allah will say, “Did you have Zann (think) that you will 
meet Me?” He will say, “No.” Allah will say, “This Day, I will 
forget you, just as you forgot Me.”'! If Allah wills, we will 
further elaborate on this subject when we explain Allah’s 
statement, 


€ireci aiifsp 
<They have forgotten Allah, so He has forgotten them} (9:67). 
qiwiigdill Jb Riss Sh Ke LAI gt Ga WN Sar esd 
447. O Children of Israel! Remember My favor which I 


bestowed upon you and that I preferred you over the ‘Alamin 
(nations)> 


Reminding the Children of Israel that They were 
preferred above the Other Nations 
Allah reminds the Children of Israel of the favors that He 
granted their fathers and grandfathers, how He showed 
preference to them by sending them Messengers from among 
them and revealing Books to them, more so than any of the 
other previous nations. Similarly, Allah said, 
divest Ble & ex! thy 
' And We chose them (the Children of Israel) over the ‘Alamin, 
(nations) with knowledge. (44:32) and, 
Kikes Heal Ka See hy Kio Hf ey OH 23s es es JE 55> 
4 abel 5 Ot op Fe Kas OL 
¢And (remember) when Musa (Moses) said to his people: ‘’O 
my people! Remember the favor of Allah to you: when He made 


Prophets among you, made you kings, honored you above the 
‘Alamin (nations).’"> (5:20). 


Abu Ja‘far Ar-Razi reported that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said that 


11) Muslim 4 :2279. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 219 


Abu Al-‘Aliyah said that Allah’s statement, 

dindil & RLS Sp 
¢and that I preferred you over the ‘Alamin> means, “The kingship, 
Messengers and Books that were granted to them, instead of 
granting such to the other kingdoms that existed during their 
time, for every period there is a nation.”'! It was also reported 


that Mujahid, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Qatadah and Ismail bin Abi 
Khalid said similarly.'?! 


The Ummah of Muhammad x is Better than the 
Children of Israel 


This is the only way the Ayah can be understood, because 
this Ummah is better than theirs, as Allah said; 


ob OB Batt gg ies; oe als Lu capt gi ge kp 

Cp) 5 Seal IN can $5 
€You are the best of people ever raised up for mankind; you 
enjoin good and forbid evil, and you believe in Allah. And had 


the People of the Book (Jews and Christians) believed, it would 
have been better for them} (3:110). 


Also, the Musnad and Sunan Collections of Hadith recorded 
that Mu‘awiyah bin Haydah Al-Qushayri said that the 
Messenger of Allah 2% said, 


eal Se itty rss pat a Gate Od Sh 
«You (Muslims) are the seventieth nation, but you are the best 
and most honored of them according to Allah .0!* 
There are many Hadiths on this subject, and they will be 

mentioned when we discuss Allah’s statement, 

€You are the best of peoples ever raised up for mankind> 

(3:110). 

as das Gh 1 eas ue Se Eh Oy eG 
(1) At-Tabari 2:24. 
(2! fbn Abi Hatim 1:158. 
5! Ahmad 5:3, Tuhfat AlAhwadhi 8 :352, and Ibn Majah 2:1433. 


220 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€i0) Way ar ars 


448. And fear a Day (of Judgement) when a person shall not 
avail another, nor will intercession be accepted from him, nor 
will compensation be taken from him, nor will they be helped.> 
After Allah reminded the Children of Israel of the favors that 
He has granted them, He warned them about the duration of 
the torment which He will punish them with on the Day of 
Resurrection. He said, 


45 UaG> 
¢And fear a Day> meaning, the Day of Resurrection, 
When a person shall not avail another» meaning, on that Day, no 
person shall be of any help to another. Similarly, Allah said, 
Al 3 Ta 35 Dd 
¢And no bearer of burdens shall bear another's burden> (35:18) 
Cink TE 305 oe yll WD 
Every man that Day will have enough to make him careless of 
others.» (80:37) and, 


ra cane K dor 


FRA Goh FG a IG UES KU 2H Co 
e Ca + 
CES erally 


¢O mankind! Have Taqwa of your Lord (by keeping your duty 
fo Him and avoiding all evil), and fear a Day when no father 
can avail aught for his son, nor a son avail aught for his 

father> (31:33). 

This indeed should serve as a great warning that both the 
father and the son will not be of help to each other on that 
Day. 

Neither Intercession, Ransom, or Assistance will be 
accepted on behalf of the Disbelievers 

Allah said, 


area Ge 


3b SB YS 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 221 


€nor will intercession be accepted from him> 
meaning, from the disbelievers. Similarly, Allah said, 


€So no intercession of intercessors will be of any use to them> (74:48) 
and described the people of the Fire saying, 
¢Now we have no intercessors. Nor a close friend (to help us)> 
(26:100-101). 


Allah’s statement here (2:48) 
Sie Ge 38 Lp 
€nor will compensation be taken from him> means, that Allah does 


not accept the disbelievers to ransom themselves. Similarly, 
Allah said, 
Sst 5 SS at 8s pal be Kb SS HS BS Aw Galt 
4 
<Verily, those who disbelieved, and died while they were 
disbelievers, the (whole) earth full of gold will not be accepted 
from anyone of them even if they offered it as a ransom} (3:91) 
UL ios AS ae GM gE A A Skee ai gp 
<Verily, those who disbelieve, if they had all that is in the 
earth, and as much again therewith to ransom themselves from 
the torment on the Day of Resurrection, it would never be 
accepted of them, and theirs would be a painful torment (5:36) 


40 SRY ys Jee 5 5p 


¢And even if he offers every ransom, it will not be accepted 
from him> (6:70) and, 


4% Sat See she 28, 5 ae - hee 4c Bee 22 od 4 vate 
ESF oe Ji pst IS Gall SY ade os soy ¥ (b> 
€So this Day no ransom shall be taken from you (hypocrites), 


nor of those who disbelieved. Your abode is the Fire. That is 
your Mawla (friend — proper place)> (57:15). 


OF + 


222 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah stated that if the people do not believe in His 
Messenger # and follow what He sent him with, then when 
they meet Him on the Day of Resurrection, after remaining on 
the path of disbelief, their family lineage and/or the 
intercession of their masters will not help them at all. It will not 
be accepted of them, even if they paid the earth’s fill of gold as 
ransom. Similarly, Allah said, 


a 
, aA 


4a 5 EG as GY OE TS sd 
<Before a Day comes when there will be no bargaining, nor 
friendship, nor intercession> (2:254) and, 


Chi Gans OD 
<On which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor 
befriending} (19:31). Allah’s statement next, 
dines oa 
qnor will they be helped.» means, “no person shall get angry - or 
anxious - on their behalf and offer them any help, or try to save 
them from Allah’s punishment.” As stated earlier on that Day, 
neither the relative, nor persons of authority will feel pity for 
the disbelievers, nor will any ransom be accepted for them. 
Consequently, they will receive no help from others and they 
will be helpless themsleves. Allah said, 
Pr et 


ak 14 AeA HS 


ons 


«While He (Allah) grants refuge (or protection), but none 
grants refuge from Him} (23:88) 


40 86 Sa VG eA ME Se YA gsd> 
€So on that Day none will punish as He will punish. And none 
will bind (the wicked, disbelievers and polytheists) as He will 


bind» (89:25-26) 
4g pl Bk wand ¥ Kup 
€’What is the matter with you? Why do you not help one another (as 


you used to do in the world)?’” Nay, but that Day they shall 
surrender} (37:25-26) and, 


Gace 8 ge Reyer werk ce ( Acke « Ge pares 2 ve 
424 We FTO OOS al ots oe LAT Gall FAAS YSp 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (25 - 49) (Part-1) 223 
SENS A aye Then why did those 
iniae ot if fon ous ie eae. as whom they had taken for 


eg a ho ae ~ || alihah (gods) besides Al- 
YG ads th CH RE a eee * 
SG N55 Bad ody ° aloAu | lah, as a way of ap- 


whee ete crease eri te Paw ic es roach (to Allah) not 
ar \ \? 3 4 ” Cae, P 
ponte mS DAD aKa help them? Nay, but 
15 NGC DOs sil bs Ste eels |] they vanished completely 
ZIMA. ert, hee ay 24 from them> (46:28). 
Sash nilbesdnion ded ast iad vi) || Also, Ad-Dahhak 
gi Pa oe eT AY orto eens FON ’ es 
Ch SKE SUI 5 is Kz GD | said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
fim - pow f i Cael ted oO mee oF Bree, ee said that Allah’s 
she? SUMS Al ESI ge AESK 5 | statement, 

be AR DOE, OS Se Ae ey eee ore 
oil ONE SS sates sade eS 315 CWE ¥ Ki vp 
EERE ee ye ten Ae WRT ; 
SUS SaaS 16 SG A Jedi oh <"What is the matter 


Pa 


a “oer 2,5 Ane we oe er ; ? Wh do You 
b MAGIA OG Xk: with you? Why do y 
Pel gl gbidal ele IY ALE ro ” 
fe . Ye ee oe se ad ee y+ Ne not help one another? > 
ope ABS 7 > Ne Sel loupe acl 515 Le 


(37:25) 
Ge Seid f 


4 BS 22.47 48 WeSC E means, “This Day, 
wd rr A) woe 
anata os you shall not have a 


peaiecil; Sy/SES eal os yaw || refuge fom Us. Not 
: of 5 

eek Veer reteseipeaeringe-~cte || this Day. Ibn Jarir 

chlo LENG FSSC ls ea said that Allah’s 

5 A MIE SIGE Libis Sess; |] statement, 

inset SD 


<nor will they be helped .> 


meaning, on that Day, they shall neither be helped by any 
helper, nor shall anyone intercede on their behalf. No repeal or 
ransom will be accepted for them, all courtesy towards them 
will have ceased, along with any helpful intercession. No type 
of help or cooperation will be available for them on that Day. 
The judgment will, on that Day, be up to the Most Great, the 
Most Just, against whom no intercessor or helper can ever 
assist. He will then award the evil deed its kind and will 
multiply the good deeds. This is similar to Allah’s statement, 


Lebo pyeties coft gh te Seas bere 9 bn cA des 55 sree 
qin Spelt pl Lf Teed ¥ Ne wait pel Aasiy> 


(1) at-Tabari 2:36 


224 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 


<But stop them, verily, they are to be questioned. “What is the 
matter with you? Why do you not help one another?” Nay, but 
that Day they shall surrender> (37:24-26).!") 


Sis Spey Sal GAY gil He BL Gea Wn os etd od 
hays 2 


€49. And (remember) when We delivered you from Fir‘awn's 
(Pharaoh) people, who were afflicting you with a horrible 
torment, killing your sons and sparing your women, and 
therein was a mighty trial from your Lord .> 


€50. And (remember) when We separated the sea for you and 
saved you and drowned Fir‘awn's (Pharaoh) people while you 
were watching .> 


The Children of Israel were saved from Pharaoh and His 
Army Who drowned 


Allah said to the Children of Israel, “Remember My favor on 
you 


Cdl He REALS Seta Iie Ss ER 15> 
¢And (remember) when We delivered you from Fir‘awn's 


(Pharaoh) people, who were afflicting you with a_ horrible 
torment,> 


meaning, 1 - Allah - saved you from them and delivered you 
from their hands in the company of Musa, after they subjected 
you to horrible torture.’ This favor came after the cursed 
Pharaoh had a dream in which he saw a fire emerge from Bayt 
Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem), and then the fire entered the houses of 
the Coptics in Egypt, with the exception of the Children of 
Israel. Its purport was that his kingship would be toppled by a 
man among the Children of Israel. It was also said that some 
of Pharaoh’s entourage said that the Children of Israel were 
expecting a man among them to arise who would establish a 
state for them. We will mention the Hadith on this subject 


("! At-Tabari 2:35. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 225 


when we explain Surat Ta Ha (20), Allah willing. After the 
dream, Pharaoh ordered that every newborn male among the 
Children of Israel be killed and that the girls be left alone. He 
also commanded that the Children of Israel be given tasks of 
hard labor and assigned the most humiliating jobs. 

The torment here refers to killing the male infants. In Surat 
Ibrahim (14) this meaning is clearly mentioned, 


4 


dads ty SE Sts gill oe Kd 
<Who were afflicting you with horrible torment, and were 
slaughtering your sons and letting your women live .> (14:6). 


We will explain this Ayah in the beginning of Surat Al-Qasas 
(28), Allah willing, and our reliance and trust are with Him. 
The meaning of, 


(525 
qwho were afflicting you> is, “They humiliated you,” as Abu 
‘Ubaydah stated. It was also said that it means, “They used to 
exaggerate in tormenting you” according to Al-Qurtubi. As for 
Allah saying, 
SiG Sess Saal BALD 

<killing your sons and sparing your women that explains His 
statement, 


qi He KS 


<who were afflicting you with horrible torment> then it explains the 
meaning of the favor He gave them, as mentioned in His 
statement, 


CHE LA ot aos USIP 


€Remember My favor which I bestowed upon you>. As for what 
Allah said in Sdrat Ibrahim, 


€3i pal Sed 
¢And remind them of the annals of Allah» (14:5) meaning, the 
favors and blessing He granted them, He then said, 


sine Hee aa ame aaa 
fied apis BES opts a Kad 


«Who were afflicting you with horrible torment, and were 


226 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


slaughtering your sons and letting your women live.> (14:6) 


So Allah mentioned saving their children from being 
slaughtered in order to remind them of the many favors that 
He granted them. 

We should state here that ‘Pharaoh’ (Fir‘awn) is a title that 
was given to every disbelieving king who ruled Egypt, whether 
from the ‘Amaliq (Canaanites) or otherwise, just as Caesar 
(Qaysar) is the title of the disbelieving kings who ruled Rome 
and Damascus. Also, Khosrau (Kisra) is the title of the kings 
who ruled Persia, while Tubb‘a is the title of the kings of 
Yemen, and the kings of Abyssinia (Ethiopia) were called 
Negus (An-Najashi). 

Allah said, 

dé K35 3 IG KIS a5 
¢And therein was a mighty trial from your Lord .> 

Ibn Jarir commented that this part of the Ayah means, “Our 
saving your fathers from the torment that they suffered by the 
hand of Pharaoh, is a great blessing from your Lord.”!] We 


should mention that in the blessing there a is test, the same 
as with hardship, for Allah said, 


ve, hte ot Bet 
425 BY, hh Sip 


te 


¢And We shall make a trial of you with evil and with good> 
(21:35) and, 
And We tried them with good (blessings) and evil (calamities) 
in order that they might turn (to obey Allah.)> (7:168). 
Allah’s statement next, 
4a g shh 6553 de Wy etal Rit KG GS > 
¢And (remember) when We separated the sea for you and saved 


you and drowned Fir‘awn's (Pharaoh) people while you were 
watching> 


means, ‘After We saved you from Fir‘awn and you escaped 
with Musa; Fir‘awn went out in your pursuit and We parted 


(G1 At-Tabari 2:48. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) __227 


the sea for you.’ Allah mentioned this story in detail, as we 
will come to know, Allah willing. One of the shortest references 
to this story is Allah’s statement, 


SSS 
<And saved you> meaning, “We saved you from them, drowning 


them while you watched, bringing relief to your hearts and 
humiliation to your enemy.” 


Fasting the Day of ‘Ashird’ 

It was reported that the day the Children of Israel were 
saved from Fir‘awn was called the day of ‘Ashura’. Imém 
Ahmad reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Messenger of 
Allah came to Al-Madinah and found that the Jews were 
fasting the day of ‘Ashtrd’. He asked them, “What is this day 
that you fast?” They said, “This is a good day during which 
Allah saved the Children of Israel from their enemy, and Musa 
used to fast this day.” The Messenger of Allah #5 said, 


is ayy Sel 
«] have more right to Musa than you have.» 


So the Messenger of Allah #: fasted that day and ordered that 
it be fasted. This Hadith was collected by Al-Bukhari, Muslim, 
An-Nasa’i and Ibn Majah,"! 


sere @ 


Be Beat By oath be Seal AAAI GAD Gees we hes Sod 
Si stds cis os Gin yy KS AL as us Ke 
451. And (remember) when We appointed for Mtisa (Moses) 


forty nights, and (in his absence) you took the calf (for worship), 
and you were Zalimtin (polytheists and wrongdoers) .> 


452. Then after that We forgave you so that you wight be 
grateful .> 

453. And (remember) when We gave Musa the Scripture (the 
Tawrah)) and the criterion (of right and wrong) so that you 


(1) Ahmad 1:291, Fath Al-Bari 4:287, Muslim 2:796, An-Nasa’i in Al- 
Kubré 2:157, and Ibn Majah 1:553. 


228 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 
may be guided aright.> 


The Children of Israel worshipped the Calf 

Allah then said, “Remember My favor on you when | forgave 
you for worshipping the calf.” This happened after Musa went 
to the meeting place with his Lord at the end of that period 


which was forty days. These forty days were mentioned in 
Surat Al-A‘rdf, when Allah said, 


tc ef coree, Lf < over 
“ 


< Poo’ Gest, Ad onl oy Wiss > 
¢And We appointed for Musa thirty nights and added (to the 
period) ten (more)> (7:142). 


It was said that these days were during the month of Dhul- 
Qa‘dah plus the first ten days in Dhul-Hijjah, after the 
Children of Israel were delivered from Fir‘awn and they safely 
crossed the sea. Allah’s statement, 


CCSSIT Sp tei 35> 


¢And (remember) when We gave Musa the Scripture> means, the 
Tawrah, 


45869 


¢And the criterion> that is that which differentiates between 
truth and falsehood, guidance and deviation. 


<So that you may be guided aright}, after escaping the sea, as 
another Ayah in Strat Al-A‘rdf clearly stated, 
AS nll Gs SM sil BGI Gas & Chel op Chi aahp 
43585, pal fa255 
¢And indeed We gave Miisé — after We had destroyed the 
generations of old — the Scripture (the Tawrah) as an 


enlightenment for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy, that 
they might remember (or receive admonition)> (28:43). 


2 


oo BE ei wih eeacal ie x 2S me cess SH 55> 
€ho5i SU A KE OG Sn te SIE SSK Be 
€54. And (remember) when Muiisd said to his people: “‘O my 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1 229 


people! Verily, you have wronged yourselves by worshipping 
the calf. So turn in repentance to your Creator and kill 
yourselves (the innocent kill the wrongdoers among you), that 
will be better for you with your Creator.” Then He accepted 
your repentance. Truly, He is the One Who accepts repentance, 
the Most Merciful .> 


The Children of Israel kill each other in Repentance 

This was the repentance required from the Children of Israel 
for worshipping the calf. Commenting on Allah’s statement; 

€ jae Ssh a EE Sy is 5 oes S8 a> 

¢And (remember) when Musa said to his people: “‘O my people! 
Verily, you have wronged yourselves by worshipping the calf...>, Al- 
Hasan Al-Basri said, “When their hearts thought of worshipping 
the calf, 

4 ahs Gs ey Dal YES SES peal 3 be GD 
¢And when they regretted and saw that they had gone astray, 
they (repented and) said: “If our Lord does not have mercy 
upon us and forgive us’’} (7:149). 

This is when Musa said to them, 
Sash Sih cent a Sap 

<O my people! Verily, you have wronged yourselves by worshipping 
the calf...>.""! Abu ‘Al-‘Aliyah, Sa‘id bin Jubayr and Ar-Rabi* 
bin Anas commented on, 

458 I Rd 

¢So turn in repentance to your Bari’) that it means, “To your 
Creator.”?! Allah’s statement, 


456 I> 
¢to your Bari’ (Creator)> alerts the Children of Israel to the 
enormity of their error and means, “Repent to He Who created 


you after you associated others with Him in worship.” 
An-Nasa'i, Ibn Janr and Ibn Abi Hatim recorded Ibn ‘Abbas 


(1) bn Abi Hatim 1:167. 
(21 ibn Abi Hatim 1:167,168. 


230 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


saying, “Allah told the Children of Israel that their repentance 
would be to slay by the sword every person they meet, be he 
father or son. They should not care whom they kill. Those 
were guilty whom Musa and Hariin were not aware of their 
guilt, they admitted their sin and did as they were ordered. So 
Allah forgave both the killer and the one killed.”") This is part 
of the Hadith about the trials that we will mention in Surat Ta 
Ha, (20) Allah willing. 

Ibn Jarir narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Musa said to his 
people, 


éneii 


<“So turn in repentance to your Creator and kill each other (the 
innocent kill the wrongdoers among you), that will be better for 
you with your Creator.” Then He accepted your repentance. 
Truly, He is the One Who accepts repentance, the Most 
Merciful .> 


Allah ordered Musa to command his people to kill each 
other. He ordered those who worshipped the calf to sit down 
and those who did not worship the calf to stand holding 
knives in their hands. When they started killing them, a great 
darkness suddenly overcame them. After the darkness lifted, 
they had killed seventy thousand of them. Those who were 
killed among them were forgiven, and those who remained 
alive were also forgiven.”7! 


Gay ks tis Hoty GE fee Zl Ee nk cee HR ye 
Blakes 5 edi GEE Le aS EME Sass 28 > 


€55.And (remember) when you said: ‘‘O Musa! We shall never 
believe in you until we see Allah plainly.” But you were seized 
with a bolt of lightning while you were looking>. 


€56.Then We raised you up after your death, so that you might 
be grateful .> 


(1) An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubrd 6 :404, At-Tabari 18:306, and Ibn Abi Hatim 
1:168. 


[21 At-Tabari 2:73. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 231 


The Best among the Children of Israel ask to see Allah; 
their subsequent Death and Resurrection 


Allah said, ‘Remember My favor on you for resurrecting you 
after you were seized with lightning when you asked to see Me 
directly, which neither you nor anyone else can bear or attain.’ 
This was said by Ibn Jurayj. Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Ayah 


Cis UGE BOSS ors Ed 
¢And (remember) when you said: “O Mtisa ! We shall never believe 
in you until we see Allah plainly.» means, “Publicly”,""! “So that 


we gaze at Allah.”?) Also, Urwah bin Ruwaym said that Allah’s 
statement, 


ayki 2h> 


While you were looking» means, “Some of them were struck 
with lightning while others were watching.”!?! Allah resurrected 
those, and struck the others with lightning. As-Suddi 
commented on, 


Cini GD 


<But you were seized with a bolt of lightning> saying; “They died, 
and Musa stood up crying and supplicating to Allah, ‘O Lord! 
What should I say to the Children of Israel when I go back to 
them after You destroyed the best of them, 


di Mi 55 | 255 5 ge KI ck 
4If it had been Your will, You could have destroyed them and me 
before; would You destroy us for the deeds of the foolish ones among 
us?>’ Allah revealed to Misa that these seventy men were 
among those who worshipped the calf. Afterwards, Allah 
brought them back to life one man at a time, while the rest of 


them were watching how Allah was bringing them back to life. 
That is why Allah’s said, 


42S goal Kay ws L3 KEEL A> 
<Then We raised you up after your death, so that you might be 
""] At-Tabari 2:81. 


(2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:170. 
13) fbn Abi Hatim 1:172. 


232 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
grateful yp") 


Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said, “Death was their punishment, and 
they were resurrected after they died so they could finish out 
their lives.” Qatadah said similarly.!?! 

‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam commented on this 
Ayah, “Musa returned from meeting with his Lord carrying the 
Tablets on which He wrote the Tawrdh. He found that they 
had worshipped the calf in his absence. Consequently, he 
commanded them to kill themselves, and they complied, and 
Allah forgave them. He said to them, These Tablets have 
Allah’s Book, containing what He commanded you and what 
He forbade for you.’ They said, ‘Should we believe this 
statement because you said it? By Allah, we will not believe 
until we see Allah in the open, until He shows us Himself and 
says: This is My Book, therefore, adhere to it. Why does He 
not talk to us as He talked to you, O, Musa?’” Then he 
(‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd) recited Allah’s statement, 


ts TEE ISD 
«We shall never believe in you until we see Allah plainly) and said, 
“So Allah’s wrath fell upon them, a thunderbolt struck them, 
and they all died. Then Allah brought them back to life after He 


killed them.” Then he (‘Abdur-Rahman) recited Allah’s 
statement, 


<Then We raised you up after your death, so that you might be 
grateful>, and said, “Musa said to them, Take the Book of 
Allah.’ They said, ‘No.’ He said, What is the matter with you?’ 
They said, The problem is that we died and came back to life.’ 
He said, Take the Book of Allah.’ They said, ‘No.’ So Allah sent 
some angels who made the mountain topple over them.”*! 

This shows that the Children of Israel were required to fulfill 
the commandments after they were brought back to life. 
However, Al-Mawardy said that there are two opinions about 
this matter. The first opinion is that since the Children of 


"! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:173. 
2] thn Abi Hatim 1:173. 
3! At-Tabari 2:88. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 233 


Israel witnessed these miracles, they were compelled to believe, 
so they did not have to fulfill the commandments. The second 
opinion states that they were required to adhere to the 
commandments, so that no responsible adult is free of such 
responsibilities. Al-Qurtubi said that this is what is correct, 
because, he said, although the Children of Israel witnessed 
these tremendous calamities and incidents, that did not mean 
that they were not responsible for fulfilling the commandments 
any more. Rather they are responsible for that, and this is 
clear. Allah knows best. 


U5 SEG Cook on WE Sia Gat Kee Uo jet pea lls 

qo Au Boat De 65 Ci 
457. And We shaded you with clouds and sent down on you 
Al-Manna and the quail, (saying): “Eat of the good lawful 
things We have provided for you,” (but they rebelled). And 
they did not wrong Us but they wronged themselves.> 


The Shade, the Manna and the Quail 


After Allah mentioned the calamities that He saved the 
Children of Israel from, He mentioned the favors that He 
granted them, saying, 


Cal cane ils 

<And We shaded you with clouds>. This Ayah mentions the white 
clouds that provided shade for the Children of Israel, protecting 
them from the sun’s heat during their years of wandering. In 
the Hadith about the trials, An-Nasa’i recorded Ibn ‘Abbas 
saying, “Allah shaded the Children of Israel with clouds during 
the years of wandering.”"! Ibn Abi Hatim said, “Narrations 
similar to that of Ibn ‘Abbas were reported from Ibn ‘Umar, Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas, Abu Mijlaz, Ad-Dahhak, and As-Suddi.”2! l- 
Hasan and Qatadah said that, 


rail peak cil; 


¢And We shaded you with clouds> “This happened when they 
were in the desert and the clouds shielded them from the 


(1 An-Nasa’? in Al-Kubra 6:405. 
[2] ton Abi Hatim 1:174. 


234 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


sun.”"! Ibn Jarir said that several scholars said that the type 
of cloud the Ayah mentioned, “was cooler and better than the 
type we know.”!! 

‘Ali bin Abi Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on 
Allah’s statement, 


45a Ke CG> 


¢And sent down on you Al-Manna>, “The manna used to descend 
to them to the trees, and they used to eat whatever they wished 
of it.” Also, Qatadah said, “The manna, which was whiter than 
milk and sweeter than honey, used to rain down on the 
Children of Israel, just as the snow falls, from dawn until 
sunrise. One of them would collect enough for that particular 
day, for if it remained more than that, it would spoil. On the 
sixth day, Friday, one would collect enough for the sixth and 
the seventh day, which was the Sabbath during which one 
would not leave home to seek his livelihood, or for anything 
else. All this occurred in the wilderness.”*! The type of manna 
that we know provides sufficient food when eaten alone, 
because it is nutritious and sweet. When manna is mixed with 
water, it becomes a sweet drink. It also changes composition 
when mixed with other types of food. However, this is not the 
only type. The evidence to this fact is that Al-Bukhari narrated, 
that Said bin Zayd said that the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 


anal tis iu; Syht oy isin 


tKam‘ah (truffles) is a type of manna, and its liquid is a 
remedy for the eyes.»!l 


This Hadith was also collected by Imam Ahmad. !! The 
group of Hadith compilers, with the exception of Abu Dawud, 
also collected it, and At-Tirmidhi graded it Hasan Sahih. at- 
Tirmidhi recorded Abu Hurayrah saying that the Messenger of 


(I thn Abi Hatim 1:174. 

21 at-Tabari 2:91. 

[3] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:176. 

(41 Fath AlL-Bari 8:14. 

(S] Ahmad 1:187. 

(6) Fath Al-Bari 8:14, Muslim 3:1619, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 6:235, An- 
Nasa’i in Al-Kubré 4 :370, and Ibn Majah 2:1143. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 235 
Allah 3% said, 
eetall tis Lasley Salt 3, BS; otis, tts Yas del g. Spee 
‘The ‘Ajwah (pressed, dried date) is from Paradise and it cures 
poison, Al-Kam’‘ah (truffles) is a form of manna, and its liquid 


heals the eye.» At-Tirmidhi is the only one of them who 
recorded this Hadith,!" 


As for the quail (Salwd) in question, ‘Ali bin Abi Talhah 
reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The (Salwa) is a bird that looks 
like the quail.) This is the same opinion reported from 
Mujahid, Ash-Sha‘bi, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Tkrimah and Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas, may Allah have mercy upon them.!! Also, 
‘Ikrimah said that the Salwa is a bird in Paradise about the 
size of a sparrow.'*! Qatadah said "The Salwa is a bird that is 
similar to a sparrow. During that time, an Israelite could catch 
as many quails as was sufficient for that particular day, 
otherwise the meat would spoil. On the sixth day, Friday, he 
would collect what is enough for the sixth and the seventh 
day, the Sabbath, during which one was not allowed to depart 
his home to seek anything.”!®! 

Allah said, 

GES GE yy lead 
<Eat of the good lawful things We have provided for you,> (7:160) 


this form of command is a simple order of allowance, guiding to 
what is good. Allah said, 


45 AE TE 55 Ub 5} 


¢And they did not wrong Us but they wronged themselves> means, 
‘We commanded them to eat from what We gave them, and to 
perform the acts of worship (but they rebelled).’ This Ayah is 
similar to Allah’s statement, 


y, ow ob, te ey 
4A WRG Ks; BH ot o> 


() Tyhfat ALAhwadhi 6 :233 & 235. 
[21 At-Tabari 2:96. 

{3] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:178. 

(41 fbn Abi Hatim 1:179. 

IS! Tid, 


236 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<Eat of the provision of your Lord, and be grateful to Him> 
(34:15). 
Yet, the Children of Israel rebelled, disbelieved and 
committed injustice against themselves, even though they saw 
the clear signs, tremendous miracles and extraordinary events. 


The Virtue of Muhammad’s Companions over the 
Companions of all Other Prophets 


Here it is important to point out the virtue of Muhammad’s 
Companions over the companions of the other Prophets. This 
includes firmness in the religion, patience and the lack of 
arrogance, may Allah be pleased with them. Although the 
Companions accompanied the Prophet # in his travels and 
battles, such as during the battle of Tabak, in intense heat and 
hardship, they did not ask for a miracle, though this was easy 
for the Prophet # by Allah’s leave. And when the Companions 
became hungry, they merely asked the Prophet 3% - to invoke 
Allah - for an increase in the amount of food. They collected 
whatever food they had and brought it to the Prophet 3, and 
he asked Allah to bless it, told each of them to take some food, 
and they filled every pot they had. Also, when they needed rain, 
the Prophet 3% asked Allah to send down rain, and a rain cloud 
came. They drank, gave water to their camels and filled their 
water skins. When they looked around, they found that the 
cloud had only rained on their camp. This is the best example 
of those who were willing to accept Allah’s decision and follow 
the Messenger of Allah 3. 


igs Use aan ios ti; Ae és Qs Wes ini sii ok iG3i 6 55> 
ol 2G dt 5G Me is et HO 
CSc achat We Lai & oe its Sa 2 ON 20 is 
458. And (remember) when We said: “Enter this town 
(Jerusalem) and eat bountifully therein with pleasure and delight 
wherever you wish, and enter the gate in prostration (or bowing 
with humility) and say: ‘Forgive us,’ and We shall forgive you 
your sins and shall increase (reward) for the good-doers.'"> 
459. But those who did wrong changed the word from that 


which had been told to them for another, so We sent upon the 
wrongdoers Rijz (a punishment) from the heaven because of 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 237 


Praia 4 By their rebellion .> 


sede o- oe a AT ede YT hake 
bs Ab ERGs Aol a ESIC 5 
gc ac ohbre este ch BL 2 itt BS ye, 
othe Tas ae ty) 58 BHT AE SF 


The Jews were 
Rebellious instead 
of Appreciative 
when They gained 
Victory 


Allah admonished 
the Jews for avoiding 
Jihad and not 
entering the holy land 
as they had been 
ordered to do when 
they came from Egypt 
with Musa. They were 
also commanded to 
fight the disbelieving 
‘Amaliq (Canaanites) 
dwelling in the holy 
land at that time. But 
they did not want to 
fight, because they 
were weak and 
exhausted. Allah 
punished them by 
causing them to become lost, and to continue wandering, as 
Allah has stated in Strat Al-Md’idah (5). The correct opinion 
about the meaning of, ‘the holy land’ mentioned here is that it 
was Bayt Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem), as As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas,!J Qatadah and Abu Muslim Al-Asfahani, as well as 
others have stated. Musa said, 


"Sten. Benes ke ‘ ashes tae 
Salt <5 CY Se; 
Sd * fener wt te tan Sener 


MABE NG AN Ia tlie 
eve 4 


HSS ote we ards Ween 
Fp GL s5 @ SALE, Kasi 
ae ew eee tt, Le aoe 


oo” o? sohe oe 
Aa pretile prods _t ran) Co pool Las ede gil 


> 


DG ESE 05 MO EIS Saiseg 5 28 515 

GGG. ALBEE, 2 

W315 NSE TI G5 G2 585 

riot 2aSipy mi Lats sft 

Ay, sth RE Hi 30 ple 2755 
dé 


ser s “ie POUR h ee seh oo ong 
EKG sie SSE Sh as ST 
ore S or 


ge Je 44% Cf wee @ caecte - aT 
16D Revco Rte Peg es Be 


4 


ih Vy SE HA ST RN sas 
€O people! Enter the holy land which Allah has assigned to you 
and turn not back (in flight).> (5:21)!! 
However, some scholars said that the holy land is Jericho, 


") Ibn Abi Hatim 1:181. 
[2] Ar-Razi 3:82. 


238 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


(Ariha) and this opinion was mentioned from Ibn ‘Abbas and 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd. 

After the years of wandering ended forty years later, in the 
company of Yawsha‘ (Joshua) bin Nun, Allah allowed the 
Children of Israel to conquer the holy land on the eve of a 
Friday. On that day, the sun was kept from setting for a little 
more time, until victory was achieved. When the Children of 
Israel conquered the holy land, they were commanded to enter 
its gate while, 


ee 


<prostrating> in appreciation to Allah for making them 
victorious, triumphant, returning them to their land and saving 
them from being lost and wandering. Al-‘Awfi said that Ibn 
‘Abbas said that, 


QUAL ari 55> 


dand enter the gate Sujjadan> means, “While bowing”.!"! Ibn Jarir 
reported Ibn ‘Abbas saying, 


C6Be di esis > 


¢and enter the gate in prostration> means, “Through a small door 
while bowing.” Al-Hakim narrated it, and Ibn Abi Hatim added, 
“And they went through the door backwards!” Al-Hasan Al- 
Basri said that they were ordered to prostrate on their faces 
when they entered the city, but Ar-Razi discounted this 
explanation. It was also said that the Sujid mentioned here 
means, ‘submissiveness’, for actually entering while prostrating 
is not possible. 

Khasif said that Tkrimah said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The 
door mentioned here was facing the Qiblah.” Ibn ‘Abbas, 
Mujahid, As-Suddi, Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak said that the 
door is the door of Hittah in lylya’, which is Jerusalem. Ar-Razi 
also reported that some of them said that it was a door in the 
direction of the Qiblah”. Khasif said that Tkrimah said that 
Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Children of Israel entered the door 
sideways. As-Suddi said that Abu Sa‘id Al-Azdy said that Abu 
Al-Kanid said that ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘dd said that they were 


(1) At-Tabari 2:113. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 239 


commanded to, 
QSL uti esi > 


<enter the gate in prostration (or bowing with humility)» but 
instead, they entered while their heads were raised in 
defiance.!!! 

Allah said next, 


Cite 35 
¢and say: ‘Hittah’>. Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “Seek Allah’s 


forgiveness.”?! Al-Hasan and Qatadah said that it means, “Say, 
‘Relieve us from our errors.”°! 


King cttlt gins eh $5 tp 
and We shall forgive you your sins and shall increase (reward) for 
the good-doers> Here is the reward for fulfilling Allah’s 
commandment. This Ayah means, “If you implement what We 
commanded you, We will forgive your sins and multiply your 
good deeds.” In summary, upon achieving victory, the Children 
of Israel were commanded to submit to Allah in tongue and 
deed and, to admit to their sins and seek forgiveness for them, 


to be grateful to Allah for the blessings He gave them, 
hastening to do the deeds that Allah loves, as He said, 


G3 A a ooee og EE HK NG SEALS AI 3G de yp 
CHOG See 13 Buy Oy ate 
4When there comes the help of Allah (to you, O Muhammad 3g 
against your enemies) and the conquest (of Makkah). And you 
see that the people enter Allah's religion (Islam) in crowds. So 
glorify the praises of your Lord, and ask His forgiveness. 
Verily, He is the One Who accepts the repentance.> (110). 


Allah said, 
48 ba all BG YL ht Sta 
<But those who did wrong changed the word from that which 
had been told to them for another>. 


0) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:183. 
(2) Thid. 
31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:185. 


240 Tafsir_Ibn_ Kathir 


Al-Bukhari recorded Abu Hurayrah saying that the Prophet 
#& said, 


od of PES the gy he Cul 051 gay Qt 
«The Children of Israel were commanded to enter the door while 
bowing and to say ‘Hittah’. Yet, they entered the door on their 
behinds, distorting the words. They said; ‘Habbah (seed), in 
Sha‘rah (a hair). 


An-Nasa’i recorded this part of it from Abu Hurayrah only, 
but he has a chain from the Prophet #4, explaining Allah’s 
statement, 


€2k-> 


¢‘Hittah’», saying, “So they deviated and said ‘Habbah.”"?! 
Similar was recorded by ‘Abdur-Razzaq, and his route was also 
collected by Al-Bukhari. Muslim and At-Tirmidhi narrated 
similar versions of this Hadith, At-Tirmidhi said, “Hasan 
Sahih.) 

The summary of what the scholars have said about this 
subject is that the Children of Israel distorted Allah’s 
command to them to submit to Him in tongue and deed. They 
were commanded to enter the city while bowing down, but 
they entered while sliding on their rear ends and raising their 
heads! They were commanded to say, ‘Hittah’ meaning, 
“Relieve us from our errors and sins.” However, they mocked 
this command and said, “Hintah (grain seed) in Sha‘irah 
(barley).” This demonstrates the worst type of rebellion and 
disobedience, and it is why Allah released His anger and 
punishment upon them, all because of their sinning and 
defying His commands. Allah said, 


eh pee thy weet ve o UMA 7 Re ne otis 
Splig BO i, Lai Se hey teach Salt ge > 


€So We sent upon the wrongdoers Rijz (a punishment) from the 
heaven because of their rebellion .> 


() Fath AL-Bari 8:14. 
[2] An-Nasai in Al-Kubra 6 :286. 
3) Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8: 291. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagaralt (50 - 74) (Part-1 24] 


Ad- Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Every word in Allah’s 
Book that says Rijz means, ‘a punishment.’ "111 Mujahid, Abu 
Malik, As-Suddi, Al-Hasan and Qatadah were reported to have 
said that Ryz means Torment.’?! Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that 
Sa‘d bin Malik, Usamah bin Zayd and Khuzaymah bin Thabit 
said that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, 


Tes es ae Pa oyte . 5% 
SiS OW fy Ge Olde By ogthlp 


(The plague is a Rijz, a punishment with which Allah 
punished those before you .v'*) 


This is also how An-Nasa’i recorded this Hadith.'*) In 
addition, the basis of this Hadith was collected in the Two 
Sahihs, 


Tees MG ik 5 ,2thh * parves 13)9 


uf you hear of the plague in a land, then do not enter it.s!°! 


Ibn Jarir recorded Usadmah bin Zayd saying that the 
Messenger of Allah # said, 


Brat KE o- RB Ol ets gia ele Ste fees 
(Ss oN oan 4 he Pro pani ans! lia of 
tThis calamity and sickness (i.e. the plague) is a Rijz, a 


punishment with which some nations who were before you were 
‘punished .»'6! 


The basis of this Hadith was also collected in the Two 
Sahihs. (7) 


ise iis Ci a, Set wool Nes ceil CS nae Sey GLET aiy> 
Saeegs gy ae ee 


oN 5 BSG SH ok & BAG Ue Sadi oll Jee ae Gi 


qo Ga 


460. And (remember) when Muisé asked for water for his 
people, We said: “Strike the stone with your stick.” Then 


W At-Tabari 2:118. 

[2] fbn Abi Hatim 1:187. 

[31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1: 186. 

4] An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubra 4 :362. 

(5) Fath Al-Bari 10:189, and Muslim 4:1739. 
(6) at-Tabari 2:116. 

I) Fath Al-Bari 6:512, Muslim 4:1737. 


_ — 


242 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


gushed forth therefrom twelve springs. Each (group of) people 
knew its own place for water. “Eat and drink of that which 
Allah has provided and do not act corruptly, making mischief 
on the earth.’’> 


Twelve Springs gush forth 


Allah said, “Remember My favor on you when I answered the 
supplication of your Prophet, Musa, when he asked Me to 
provide you with water. I made the water available for you, 
making it gush out through a stone. Twelve springs burst out 
of that stone, a designated spring for each of your tribes. You 
eat from the manna and the quails and drink from the water 
that I provided for you, without any effort or hardship for you. 
So worship the One Who did this for you. 


Cinelt Ni 3 KS Sip 


€And do not act corruptly, making mischief on the earthy meaning, 
“Do not return the favor by committing acts of disobedience 
that cause favors to disappear.” 


Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Children of Israel, “Had a square 
stone that Masa was commanded to strike with his staff and, 
as a result, twelve springs burst out of that stone, three on 
each side. Each tribe was, therefore, designated a certain 
spring, and they used to drink from their springs. They never 
had to travel from their area, they would find the same bounty 
in the same manner they had in the first area.”!"! This 
narration is part of the long Hadith that An-Nasa’, Ibn Jarir 
and Ibn Abi Hatim recorded about the trials. 

This story is similar to the story in Surat Al-‘Araf (Chapter 
7) although the latter was revealed in Makkah. In Sarat Al- 
A'‘rdf, Allah used the third person when He mentioned the 
Children of Israel to the Prophet # and narrated what He 
favored them with. In this Strat Al-Bagarah, which was 
revealed in Al-Madinah, Allah directed His Speech at the 
Children of Israel. Further, Allah said in Surat ALA ‘raf, 


gree yrree bey 


") 
ee ee GH 1, Ete 


DY At-Tabari 2:120. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 243 


¢And there gushed forth out of it twelve springs» (7:160), 
describing what first occurred when the water begins to gush 
out. In the Ayah in Strat Al-Bagarah, Allah described what 
happened later on, meaning when the water burst out in full 
force. Allah knows best. 


fe GAT LE & G EY GG UO Bt 5 A ASS ay bli 55> 
“2 8 lt 3 od AAS Ges Gs es a 
, $c | Cone OR 


461. And (remember) when you said, ‘‘O Miisa ! We cannot 
endure one kind of food. So invoke your Lord for us to bring 
forth for us of what the earth grows, its herbs, its cucumber its 
Fim, its lentils and its onions.’ He said, ‘Would you 
exchange that which is better for that which is lower? Go you 
down to any town and you shall find what you want!” 


The Children of Israel preferred Foods inferior to Manna 
and Quails 


Allah said, “And remember My favor on you when I sent 
down the manna and quails to you, a good, pure, beneficial, 
easily acquired food. And remember your ungratefulness for 
what We granted you. Remember how you asked Musa to 
exchange this type of food for an inferior type that consists of 
vegetation, and so forth.” Al-Hasan Al-Basri said about the 
Children of Israel, “They were bored and impatient with the 
type of food they were provided. They also remembered the life 
they used to live, when their diet consisted of lentils, onions, 
garlic and herbs.” They said, 


ad & EY 22% G68 26 OG es pe & AS J is 
dass Gots Gs GES 


4O Musa ! We cannot endure one kind of food. So invoke your 
Lord for us to bring forth for us of what the earth grows, its herbs, 
ifs cucumbers, its Fiim, its lentils and its onions). They said, 


€u05 fab > 


<One kind of food» meaning, the manna and quails, because 
they ate the same food day after day. The Ayah mentioned 


244 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


lentils, onions and herbs, which are all known types of foods. 
As for the Fim, Ibn Mas‘td read it, Tham (garlic). Also, Ibn Abi 
Hatim narrated that Al-Hasan said about the Ayah, 


4G55> 
dlts Fum}, “Ibn ‘Abbas said that Fim means, garlic.”!! 


He also said that the expression, ‘Fumi-lannd’ means, ‘bake 
for us’, according to the languages of old. Ibn Jarir 
commented, “If this is true, then ‘Fum’ is one of the words 
whose pronounciation were altered, the letter ‘fa’ was replaced 
by the letter ‘tha’, since they are similar in sound.”?! And 
Allah knows best. Others said that Fim is wheat, the kind 
used for bread. Al-Bukhari said, “Some of them said that Fum 
includes all grains or seeds that are eaten.” 

Allah’s statement, 
46h Sh ST A oH AIZA 55> 
<He said, “Would you exchange that which is better for that which is 
lower?’’} criticized the Jews for asking for inferior foods, 
although they were living an easy life, eating tasty, beneficial 
and pure food. Allah’s statement, 


qm iLat> 


<Go ve down to any Misr> means, ‘any city’, as Ibn ‘Abbas 
said.) Ibn Jarir also reported that Abu Al-‘Aliyah and Ar-Rabi 
bin Anas said that the Ayah refers to Misr, the Egypt of 
Fir‘awn.'4! The truth is that the Ayah means any city, as Ibn 
‘Abbas and other scholars stated. Therefore, the meaning of 
Mus4’s statement to the Children of Israel becomes, “What you 
are asking for is easy, for it is available in abundance in any 
city that you might enter. So since what you asked for is 
available in all of the villages and cities, I will not ask Allah to 
provide us with it, especially when it is an inferior type of food.” 
This is why Musa said to them, 


LeU Lad Of a at Eh ol SB edt Zssp 


_ 


"1 thn Abi Hatim 1:193. 
[21 At-Tabari 2:130. 
3] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:194 
4] At-Tabari 2:134. 


Sarah 2. Al-Baqarah (50 - 74) (Part-1 245 


«Would you exchange that which is better for that which is 
lower? Go you down to any town and you shall find what you 
want! > 


Since their request was the result of boredom and arrogance 
and since fulfilling it was unnecessary, their request was 
denied. Allah knows best. 


aye er, hy oath cul fee cr peer beg cote Bh aye fe ee be 
sk, Ss UF WEY Gi Si cp 3k ) Bec Ta Aye EY; 
ine ee the ot ve ve oye Kote oe oe at aoe S 

iw yee Iyteoy (ae Ge aS oN A Ji otis al 


461. And they were covered with humiliation and misery, and 
they drew on themselves the wrath of Allah. That was because 
they used to disbelieve in the Aydt (proofs, evidence) of Allah 
and killed the Prophets wrongfully. That was because they 
disobeyed and used to transgress the bounds (in their 
disobedience to Allah, i.e. commit crimes and sins.)> (2:61) 


Covering the Jews in Humiliation and Misery 
Allah said, 
qi, Ai 2k EZ 


<And they were covered with humiliation and misery». This Ayah 
indicates that the Children of Israel were plagued with 
humiliation, and that this will continue, meaning that it will 
never cease. They will continue to suffer humiliation at the 
hands of all who interact with them, along with the disgrace 
that they feel inwardly. Al-Hasan commented, “Allah humiliated 
them, and they shall have no protector. Allah put them under 
the feet of the Muslims, who appeared at a time when the 
Majus (Zoroastrians) were taking the Jizyah (tax) from the 
Jews.”] Also, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and As-Suddi 
said that ‘misery’ used in the Ayah means, ‘poverty.?! ‘Atiyah 
Al-‘Awfi said that ‘misery’ means, ‘paying the tilth (tax).49) In 
addition, Ad-Dahhak commented on Allah’s statement, 


(1) fbn Abi Hatim 1:195, 196. 
[21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:196. 
(3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:196. 


246 Tafsir_Ibn_ Kathir 
45 <5 te SS 


<and they drew on themselves the wrath of Allah>, “They deserved 
Allah’s anger.”'! Also, Ibn Jarir said that, 


C51 GS by SGD 


<and they drew on themselves the wrath of Allah> means, “They 
went back with the wrath. Similarly, Allah said, 


ads tk AAS ap 
€Verily, I intend to let you draw my sin on yourself as well as 
yours (Al-M@’idah 5:29) meaning, ‘You will end up carrying my, 
and your, mistakes instead of me’. Thus, the meaning of the 
Ayah becomes, They went back carrying Allah’s anger; Allah’s 
wrath descended on them; they deserved Allah’s anger.’ "1 
Allah’s statement, 


Ci A BB PS ST ge, OKs BE LAL Sp 


<That was because they used to disbelieve in the Aydt (proofs, 
evidences, etc.) of Allah and killed the Prophets wrongfully.» means, 
“This is what We rewarded the Children of Israel with: 
humiliation and misery.” Allah’s anger that descended on the 
Children of Israel was a part of the humiliation they earned, 
because of their defiance of the truth, disbelief in Allah’s Aydt 
and belittling the carriers of Allah’s Law i.e. the Prophets and 
their following. The Children of Israel rejected the Messengers 
and even killed them. Surely, there is no form of disbelief worse 
than disbelieving in Allah’s Aydt and murdering the Prophets of 
Allah. 


Meaning of Kibr 


Similarly, in a Hadith recorded in the Two Sahihs the 
Messenger of Allah 3 said, 


61 L335 Sah ths sin 
«'Kibr, is refusing the truth and degrading (belittling) people.»'*! 
Ul At-Tabari 2:138 


[2] thid. 
(31 Muslim 1:93. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1 247 


Imam Ahmad recorded, ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad saying that the 
Messenger of Allah 3 said, 


ie Gts BG fuayy 0 8 I 3 US oy wah gy cet ah 

a? mt ii 
«The people who will receive the most torment on the Day of 
Resurrection are: a man who was killed by a Prophet or who killed a 


Prophet, an unjust ruler and one who mutilates (the dead) .3!"| 
Allah’s statement, 


Gives Yeas 1s G 5D 
4That was because they disobeyed and used to transgress the bounds> 
mentions another reason why the Children of Israel were 
punished in this manner, for they used to disobey and 
transgress the limits. Disobedience is to do what is prohibited, 


while transgression entails overstepping the set limits of what is 
allowed and what is prohibited. Allah knows best. 


5x5 pS HG AL Ge SF BG AG Uh AIG ie Gall Sup 

EBA AG aye GE SG 2 ee dA Cs 
462. Verily, those who believe and those who are Jews and 
Christians, and Sabians (Sabi'in), whoever believes in Allah 
and the Last Day and does righteous good deeds shall have their 


reward with their Lord, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they 
grieve .> 


Faith and doing Righteous Deeds equals Salvation in all 
Times 


After Allah described the condition - and punishment - of 
those who defy His commands, fall into His prohibitions and 
transgress set limits by committing prohibited acts, He stated 
that the earlier nations who were righteous and obedient 
received the rewards for their good deeds. This shall be the 
case, until the Day of Judgment. Therefore, whoever follows 
the unlettered Messenger and Prophet shall acquire eternal 
happiness and shall neither fear from what will happen in the 
future nor become sad for what has been lost in the past. 


(1) Ahmad 1:407. 


248 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


. an Similarly, Allah said, 
Spe Nh eG (SL NG ign GANS || SS ¥ i dat i Vp 
AA ELA Le IL AG ato || eche oy 4k 
2. gd fre, 4ee Ko Soe Gio 6: ep ate " 
SODA AVS EG ENG 4y55 Le |] €No doubt! Verily, the 
rere oh 28 & tat edecer veger é 220504 Awliya’ of Allah , to 
HLL Ae spl Ra ols aE b | fear shall come upon 
Ls Kary Gry 5 85 didasul 55555 |] them nor shall they 
ve 4 4 4 abe ore t Ae Sek on a ve os - a grieve> (10:62). 

BAM CS Ke ail LVS 5 | one angels will 
raye . 4 Of ots tates 0f4, gaye “ . 7 
HANG Mab CelGatere 5 ODS _~1{ || proclaim to the dying 
Senco pee center [Delievers, as 

LS ChE alps, pL || mentioned, 

Ayame le BR - Lt Etta OAL LIS Ls Pore cer ce soe eke the te 
NS35 Oath Me uae || os at cS ye alt ap 
C4 Gohrebie Fores go ce 4 £oces Gee ie » ae oe 
CIC AAS ao ecs | te Hes ses 
Het weer 2 deh ee oe 44020 Reet Ge the te ben, 
NG DB nS ASA SASH | hoe O He tea 


Se aQ legs pudcug | 2S ff at vy 

Aw wae ASEM IG <Verily, those who say: 

eyes Bo cee, || Our Lord is Allah 

OS) a—tile| |! (alone),”” and then they 

stand firm, on them the 

angels will descend (at the time of their death) (saying): ‘Fear not, 

nor grieve! But receive the glad tidings of Paradise which you have 
been promised!’’>. (41:30) 


2 


The Meaning of Mu’min, or Believer 
‘Ali bin Abi Talhah narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas, about, 
C25 2345 AN cin & ai WG We all oe Gt HD 
<Verily, those who believe and those who are Jews and 


Christians, and Sabians, whoever believes in Allah and the Last 
Day>'?! 


1) The obedient believers. 
[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:198. 


Stirahi 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 249 


that Allah revealed the following Ayah afterwards, 


CSS & 5H 9 25 1b TE Gy heyt BBS 5p 
¢And whoever seeks religion other than Islam, it will never be 
accepted of him, and in the Hereafter he will be one of the 
losers> (3:85). 


This statement by Ibn ‘Abbas indicates that Allah does not 
accept any deed or work from anyone, unless it conforms to 
the Law of Muhammad 3 that is, after Allah sent Muhammad 
3. Before that, every person who followed the guidance of his 
own Prophet was on the correct path, following the correct 
guidance and was saved. 


Why the Jews were called ‘Yahid’ 


The Jews are the followers of Prophet Musa, who used to 
refer to the Tawrah for judgment. Yahdd is a word that 
means, ‘repenting’, just as Musa said, 

€5, TS Gp 
<Certainly we have Hudna to You> meaning, we repent to You. 
This indicates that they were first called Yahtd, because they 
repented and, because they were kind to each other. It was also 
said that they were called Yahtd in reference to Yahuda 
(Judah) the eldest son of Prophet Ya‘qub. Abu ‘Amr bin Al-‘Ala’ 


said that they were called Yahud, because they swayed when 
they read the Tawrah. 


Why the Christians were called ‘Nasara’ 


When ‘Isa was sent, the Children of Israel were required to 
follow and obey him. The followers of ‘isa and his companions 
are called An-Nasdrda, because they gave aid and support to 
each other. They are also called Ansar (helpers), as ‘Isa said, 


Cail Seal S2 Sheil HE BF Sy wal > 
¢“Who will be my helpers in Allah's cause?” Al-Hawiriyyiin 
said : “We are the helpers of Allah.’’> (61:14) 


It was said that they were called ‘Nasara’, because they 
inhabited a land called An-Nasirah (Nazareth), as Qatadah, Ibn 


250 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Jurayj and Ibn ‘Abbas were reported to have said,!") Allah 
knows best. Nasdra is certainly plural for Nasrdan. 

When Allah sent Muhammad as the Last and Final Prophet 
and Messenger to all of the Children of Adam, mankind was 
required to believe in him, obey him and refrain from what he 
prohibited them; those who do this are true believers. The 
Ummah of Muhammad #% was called ‘Mu’minin’ (believers), 
because of the depth of their faith and certainty, and because 
they believe in all of the previous Prophets and matters of the 
Unseen. 


The Sabi’tin or Sabians 


There is a difference of opinion over the identity of the 
Sabians. Sufyan Ath-Thawri said that Layth bin Abu Sulaym 
said that Mujahid said that, “The Sabians are between the 
Majas, the Jews and the Christians. They do not have a 
specific religion.”?! Similar is reported from Ibn Abi Najih.!>! 
Similar statements were attributed to ‘Ata’ and Said bin 
Jubayr.'4! They (others) say that the Sabians are a sect among 
the People of the Book who used to read the Zabutr (Psalms), 
others say that they are a people who worshipped the angels 
or the stars. It appears that the closest opinion to the truth, 
and Allah knows best, is Mujahid’s statement and those who 
agree with him like Wahb bin Munabbih, that the Sabians are 
neither Jews nor Christians nor Majas nor polytheists. Rather, 
they did not have a specific religion that they followed and 
enforced, because they remained living according to their 
Fitrah (instinctual nature). This is why the idolators used ,to 
call whoever embraced Islam a ‘Sabi’, meaning, that he 
abandoned all religions that existed on the earth. Some 
scholars stated that the Sabians are those who never received 
a message by any Prophet. And Allah knows best. 


Bote Par ee ot tar ~ oar soe regee 22 Tae on rd 
Kid 15 0 S55 3h Kh CLL 5 KIS Cay Ket, CN 55> 
o 4 be woe ae Se on gee Bae ow . to th gine age 
a 2X diy Ke At $5 VG oS Le ANP 
1) ar-Razi 3:97. 
[21 at-Tabari 2:146. 


13] Ibid. 
(41 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:199-200. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 251 


€.055,H 
€63. And (O Children of Isra’il, remember) when We took your 
covenant and We raised above you the Mount (saying): “Hold 


fast to that which We have given you, and remember that which 
is therein so that you may acquire Taqwa.> 


€64. Then after that you turned away. Had it not been for the 
grace and mercy of Allah upon you, indeed you would have 
been among the losers.> 


Taking the Covenant from the Jews 


Allah reminded the Children of Israel of the pledges, 
covenants and promises that He took from them to believe in 
Him alone, without a partner, and follow His Messengers. 
Allah stated that when He took their pledge from them, He 
raised the mountain above their heads, so that they affirm the 
pledge that they gave Allah and abide by it with sincerity and 
seriousness. Hence, Allah’s statement, 


US 5k Se TE ay a Al Uy Sh Se cs Sa eas ap 


€And (remember) when We raised the mountain over them as if 
it had been a canopy, and they thought that it was going to fall 
on them. (We said): “Hold firmly to what We have given you 
(Tawrah), and remember that which is therein (act on its 
commandments), so that you may fear Allah and obey Him.”> 
(7:171). 


The mount mentioned here is At-Tur, just as it was explained 
in Surat Al-A‘raf, according to the Tafsir of Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, 
‘Ata’, Tkrimah, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and 
others.!"| This is more obvious. There is another report from 
Ibn ‘Abbas saying; The Tur is a type of mountain that 
vegetation grows on, if no vegetation grows on it, it is not called 
Tar.”*! And in the Hadith about the trials, Ibn ‘Abbas said: 
“When they (the Jews) refused to obey, Allah raised the 


0) Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :203 
21 hid. 


252 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


mountain above their heads so that they would listen.” 


Al-Hasan said that Allah’s statement, 
455) Kak CH 
4Hold fast to that which We have given you} means, the 


Tawrah.! Mujahid said that the Ayah commanded, “Strictly 
adhere to it.”>! Abu Al-‘Aliyah and Ar-Rabi‘ said that, 


aa 6 USSG > 
¢and remember that which is thereiny means, “Read the Tawrah 
and implement it.”“! Allah’s statement, 


ii $5 VG G5 os Ls AG BD 
Then after that you turned away. Had it not been for the grace of 
Allah» means, “Yet, after the firm pledge that you gave, you still 
deviated and broke your pledge”; 


46855 Ki al 5 BD 
¢Had it not been for the grace and mercy of Allah upon youp, 


meaning, by forgiving you and by sending the Prophets and 
Messengers to you, 


CipHl  AXS> 


<Indeed you would have been among the losers} meaning, in this 
life and the Hereafter due to their breach of the covenant. 


Cicadas GE GH GS IK 
465. And indeed you knew those amongst you who 
transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath (i.e. Saturday). We 
said to them: “Be you monkeys, despised and rejected .""> 
466. So We made this punishment an example for those in front 
of it and those behind it, and a lesson for Al-Muttagin (the 
pious .» 


(1) An-Nasai in Al-Kubrd 6 :396. 
[2] thn Abi Hatim 1 :204 

(31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:205. 

14] thid. 


Stirah 2, Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 253 


The Jews breach the Sanctity of the Sabbath 
Allah said, 
he Lahp 

¢And indeed you knew>. This Ayah means, O Jews! Remember 
that Allah sent His torment on the village that disobeyed Him 
and broke their pledge and their covenant to observe the 
sanctity of the Sabbath. They began using deceitful means to 
avoid honoring the Sabbath by placing nets, ropes and artificial 
pools of water for the purpose of fishing before the Sabbath. 
When the fish came in abundance on Saturday as usual, they 
were caught in the ropes and nets for the rest of Saturday. 
During the night, the Jews collected the fish after the Sabbath 
ended. When they did that, Allah changed them from humans 
into monkeys, the animals having the form closest to humans. 
Their evil deeds and deceit appeared lawful on the surface, but 
they were in reality wicked. This is why their punishment was 
compatible with their crime. This story is explained in detail in 
Surat Al-A‘raf, where Allah said (7:163), 


1 Adi gy Sti y dl ee Se AM al yy 4yks> 
Bho 4 ne 


HG Mee Rysl Y OY 5 EE iM Ee tls 
ae 485420 BS cg, 


¢And ask them (O Muhammad 2) about the town that was by 
the sea; when they transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath 
(i.e. Saturday): when their fish came to them openly on the 
Sabbath day, and did not come to them on the day they had no 
Sabbath. Thus We made a trial of them, for they used to rebel 
(disobey Allah) .>(7:163) 


In his Tafsir, Al-‘Awfi reported from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said, 
direct £55 (BF pi Cts 


«We said to them: “Be you monkeys, despised and rejected’ means, 
“Allah changed their bodies into those of monkeys and swines. 
The young people turned into monkeys while the old people 
turned into swine.”!!! Shayban An-Nahwi reported that 


01 ibn Abi Hatim 1:210. 


254 . Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Qatadah commented on, 
icc 13 UF po ib 
<We said to them: “Be you monkeys, despised and rejected’’, 


“These people were turned into howling monkeys with tails, 
after being men and women.”!! 


The Monkeys and Swine that exist now are not the 
Descendants of Those that were transformed 


Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Those who 
violated the sanctity of the Sabbath were turned into monkeys, 
then they perished without offspring.”?! Ad-Dahhak said that 
Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Allah turned them into monkeys because of 
their sins. They only lived on the earth for three days, for no 
transformed person ever lives more than three days. They did 
not eat, drink or have offspring. Allah transformed their 
shapes into monkeys, and He does what He wills, with whom 
He wills and He changes the shape of whomever He wills. On 
the other hand, Allah created the monkeys, swines and the 
rest of the creation in the six days (of creation) that He 
mentioned in His Book.”!*! 

Allah’s statement, 


4 tty oO reere 
471% alas 


<So We made this punishment an example> means, Allah made the 
people of this village, who violated the sanctity of the Sabbath, 


45S 
¢an example> via the way they were punished. Similarly, Allah 
said about Pharaoh, 
455M GM 56 LGD 
€So Allah, seized him with punishing example for his last and first 


transgression} (79:25). 
Allah’s statement, 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :209 
[21 hid. 
(31 At-Tabari 2:167. 


ao 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 255 
ile 5 Go HID 
¢for those in front of it and those behind itp» meaning, for the other 
villages. Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “Meaning, ‘We made this 
village an example for the villages around it by the manner in 
which We punished its people.’” Similarly, Allah said, 
Cie ol CM Gos Sal GG Kiso RIN ah 
¢And indeed We have destroyed towns (populations) round 
about you, and We have (repeatedly) shown (them) the Ayat 
(proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) in 


various ways that they might return (to the truth and believe in 
the Oneness of Allah ~ Islamic Monotheism)>.(46:27) 


Therefore, Allah made them an example for those who lived 
during their time as well as a reminder for those to come, by 
preserving their story. This is why Allah said, 
¢and a lesson for Al-Muttagin (the pious)», meaning, a reminder. 
This Ayah means, “The torment and punishment that this 
village suffered was a result of indulging in Allah’s prohibitions 
and their deceit. Hence, those who have Taqwa should be 
aware of their evil behavior, so that what occurred to this 
village does not befall them as well.” Also, Imam Abu ‘Abdullah 
bin Battah reported that Abu Hurayrah said that the 
Messenger of Allah 2 said, 


todd S3L ait 6 ts Ldn $2 eck U 15535 Vo 
‘Do not commit what the Jews committed, breaching what 


Allah has forbidden, by resorting to the lowest types of 
deceit .v!"! 


This Hadith has a good (Jayid) chain of narration. Allah 
knows best. 
wih $2 J6 3s ca Be Se Wa oF otk at 8 a os 15 5p 


diag 3 ast si 
467. And (remember) when Musa said to his people: ‘Verily, 


1) Irud’ Al-Ghalil 5 :375. 


256 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


Allah commands you that you slaughter a cow.’ They said, 
“Do you make fun of us?” He said, “I take Allah’s refuge from 
being among Al-Jahilin (the ignorant or the foolish) .”’> 


The Story of the murdered Israeli Man and the Cow 


Allah said, ‘O Children of Israel! Remember how I blessed 
you with miracle of the cow that was the means for 
discovering the identity of the murderer, when the murdered 
man was brought back to life.’ 

Ibn Abi Hatim recorded ‘Ubaydah As-Salm4ni saying, “There 
was a man from among the Children of Israel who was impotent. 
He had substantial wealth, and only a nephew who would 
inherit from him. So his nephew killed him and moved his body 
at night, placing it at the doorstep of a certain man. The next 
morning, the nephew cried out for revenge, and the people took 
up their weapons and almost fought each other. The wise men 
among them said, ‘Why would you kill each other, while the 
Messenger of Allah is still among you?’ So they went to Musa 
and mentioned the matter to him and Musa said, 


Cagle AST SAG AA J6 tye Chl Bu Ts AS J Sak at ay 


<Verily, Allah commands you that you slaughter a cow.” 
They said, ‘Do you make fun of us?” He said, “I take Allah's 
refuge from being among Al-Jahilin (the ignorant or the 
foolish)>.” 
“Had they not disputed, it would have been sufficient for them 
to slaughter any cow. However, they disputed, and the matter 
was made more difficult for them, until they ended up looking 
for the specific cow that they were later ordered to slaughter. 
They found the designated cow with a man, only who owned 
that cow. He said, ‘By Allah! I will only sell it for its skin’s fill 
of gold.’ So they paid the cow’s fill of its skin in gold, 
slaughtered it and touched the dead man with a part of it. He 
stood up, and they asked him, ‘Who killed you?’ He said, Tnat 
man,’ and pointed to his nephew. He died again, and his nephew 
was not allowed to inherit him. Thereafter, whoever committed 
murder for the purpose of gaining inheritance was not allowed to 
inherit.”""! Ibn Jarir reported something similar to that. Allah 


(1 thn Abi Hatim 1:114. 


sao iN ay 
~s ee ee ee Perens o at 747% Pose be 
Uy ste as NGL AG KA Denise 


Pde GP age +S 2735, % ~— oe esq ce ~, 


ARS) LALA Se Jb TORY aotatE ot 
Susie MST a aE 


Lopes EUG RE Gai egal 
oe “8 ape eis SSE Ls 


e.cese 


Seats 


SF 


E32 & 


ace fr & airs 


Peany sob 3 shaityedted 
aaa ve BAIS Ws eNT An 
Ry ver bars AiG ACEE 0 Pa seal eee) 
sh 508 35 SHES AS AIO 


cael & 


ae 


“ne, poor 


hal 
ORFS Re 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 257 


fay pyres ee urete Mee 
Wiles CUE ay 
Park. ae to 7% poe the 
GO ft SG BI 
“3g Aas < 42 CyLy sr 
} Jao AY JE 
BIS RE wee pers Be ce 
a les eb tte 3 
Cee Soo she “3, 2 
a Py 


ta de o - Ronayne 
M5 ON 53 OS Y 0% 


© - 
a Se He a os 
Aree 


oe it U5 


<68. “They said, 
“Call upon your 


Lord for us that He may make plain to us what it is!’ He said, 
“He says, ‘Verily, it is a cow neither too old nor too young, 
but (it is) between the two conditions’, so do what you are 


commanded ."" 


469. They said, ‘Call upon your Lord for us to make plain to 
us its colour.” He said, “He says, ‘It is a yellow cow, bright in 


its colour, pleasing the beholders.’ ’’> 


<€70. They said, “Call upon your Lord for us to make plain to 
us what it is. Verily, to us all cows are alike. And surely, if 


Allah wills, we will be guided.’"> 


471. He (Musa) said, “He says, ‘It is a cow neither trained to 


( At-Tabari 2:183. 


258 = Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


till the soil nor water the fields, sound, having no blemish in 
it.’ They said, “Now you have brought the truth.” So they 
slaughtered it though they were near to not doing it.> 


The Stubbornness of the Jews regarding the Cow; Allah 
made the Matter difficult for Them 


Allah mentioned the stubbornness of the Children of Israel 
and the many unnecessary questions they asked their 
Messengers. This is why when they were stubborn, Allah made 
the decisions difficult for them. Had they slaughtered a cow, 
any cow, it would have been sufficient for them, as Ibn ‘Abbas 
and ‘Ubaydah have said. Instead, they made the matter 
difficult, and this is why Allah made it even more difficult for 
them. They said, 


dip GS at aS Eat> 
€Call upon your Lord for us that He may make plain to us what it 


is!>, meaning, “What is this cow and what is its description?” 
Masa said, 


5K 5 BOY TE SK A> 


€He says, ‘Verily, it is a cow neither too old nor too young’, 
meaning, that it is neither old nor below the age of breeding. 
This is the opinion of Abu Al-‘Aliyah, As-Suddi, Mujahid, 
‘Ikrimah, ‘Atiyah Al-‘Awfi, ‘Ata’, Al-Khurdsani, Wahb bin 
Munabbih, Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and Ibn ‘Abbas,!"! 
Ad-Dahhak reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


4s Sie BUD 
¢But (it is) between the two conditions> means, “Neither old nor 
young. Rather, she was at the age when the cow is strongest 


and fittest.”?! In his Tafsir Al-‘Awfi reported from Ibn ‘Abbas 
that, 


43h Bp 
<bright in its colour “A deep yellowish white.”*! 
(1 Tbn Abi Hatim 1:216. 


[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:217. 
IS) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:221. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1) 7 259 
As-Suddi said, 
4 Sei 55) 


<pleasing the beholder> meaning, that it pleases those who see 
it." This is also the opinion of Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Qatadah and 
Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas.!?] Furthermore, Wahb bin Munabbih said, 
“If you look at the cow’s skin, you will think that the sun’s rays 
radiate through its skin.”5! The modern version of the Tawrah 
mentions that the cow in the Ayah was red, but this is an 
error. Or, it might be that the cow was so yellow that it 
appeared blackish or reddish in color. Allah’s knows best. 


40 25 Ai i> 


<Verily, to us all cows are alike> this means, that since cows are 
plentiful, then describe this cow for us further, 


40 TE a1 5} 
¢And surely, if Allah wills> and if you further describe it to us, 
sli 
€we will be guided.» 
(ili GG SA 1 UY Te 
¢<He says, ‘It is a cow neither trained to till the soil nor water the 
fields’) meaning, it is not used in farming, or for watering 


purposes. Rather, it is honorable and fair looking. ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq said that Ma‘mar said that Qatadah said that, 


€id 2p 


¢sound> means, “The cow does not suffer from any defects.”!*) 
This is also the opinion of Abu Al-‘Aliyah and Ar-Rabi‘. Mujahid 
also said that the Ayah means the cow is free from defects.'>! 
Further, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani said that the Ayah means that its 
legs and body are free of physical defects.!° 


") Ibn Abi Hatim 1:222. 
71 Ibid. 

3] At-Tabari 2 :202 

1 At-Tabari 2:214. 

IS) At-Tabari 2:225. 

Il at-Tabari 2:226. 


260 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Also, Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Ayah, 


4S (BE 05 EASY 
€So they slaughtered it though they were near to not doing it> 
means, “They did not want to slaughter it.”!!! 

This means that even after all the questions and answers 
about the cow’s description, the Jews were still reluctant to 
slaughter the cow. This part of the Qur’an criticized the Jews 
for their behavior, because their only goal was to be stubborn, 
and this is why they nearly did not slaughter the cow. Also, 
‘Ubaydah, Mujahid, Wahb bin Munabbih, Abu Al-‘Aliyah and 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, “The Jews bought 
the cow with a large amount of money.”7] There is a 
difference of opinion over this. 


BS Got, BS GE was 2s eb 8G Be GSE CE HHS typ 
Ss SUS wcsk Sats Ayal St 

€72. And (remember) when you killed a man and disagreed 

among yourselves as to the crime. But Allah brought forth that 

which you were Taktumun .> 

473. So We said: “Strike him (the dead man) with a piece of it 

(the cow).’’ Thus Allah brings the dead to life and shows you 


His Aydt (proofs, evidences, etc.) so that you may 
understand .> 


Bringing the murdered Man back to Life 
Al-Bukhari said that, 


ba i556) 
¢And_ disagreed among yourselves as to the crime} means, 
“Disputed.”!*! 
This is also the Tafsir of Mujahid. ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani and Ad- 
Pahhak said, “Disputed about this matter.”*4! Also, Ibn Jurayj 
said that, 


Ol At-Tabari 2:219. 

12) At-Tabari 2:221. 

3) Fath Al-Bari 6 :506 

4] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:229. 


Sdrah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1 261 


tes SG CS LS 55) 
¢<And (remember) when you killed a man and disagreed among 
yourselves as to the crime> means, some of them said, “You killed 
him,” while the others said, “No you killed him.”"! This is also 
the Tafsir of ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam.?! Mujahid 
said that, 


dig ES UE Gp 
qBut Allah brought forth that which you were Taktumtin> means, 
“what you were hiding.”!’! 
Allah said, 
diets thi Cap 


<So We said: “Strike him (the dead man) with a piece of it (the 
cow)’’> meaning, “any part of the cow will produce the miracle 
(if they struck the dead man with it).” We were not told which 
part of the cow they used, as this matter does not benefit us 
either in matters of life or religion. Otherwise, Allah would have 
made it clear for us. Instead, Allah made this matter vague, so 
this is why we should leave it vague. Allah’s statement, 


€isii gl BS) 
«Thus Allah brings the dead to life> means, “They struck him with 
it, and he came back to life.” This Ayah demonstrates Allah’s 
ability in bringing the dead back to life. Allah made this 
incident proof against the Jews that the Resurrection shall 
occur, and ended their disputing and stubbornness over the 
dead person. 


Allah mentioned His bringing the dead back to life in five 
instances in Surat Al-Bagarah. First Allah said, 


<Then We raised you up after your death>. He then mentioned the 
story about the cow. Allah also mentioned the story of those 
who escaped death in their land, while they were numbering in 


Ol at-Tabari 2:225. 
21 At-Tabari 2:225. 
3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:229. 


262 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


the thousands. He also mentioned the story of the Prophet who 
passed by a village that was destroyed, the story of Abraham 
and the four birds, and the land that comes back to life after it 
has died. All these incidents and stories alert us to the fact that 
bodies shall again become whole, after they were rotten. The 
proof of Resurrection is also reiterated in Allah’s statement, 

Ys Gs mGiest 5G A a eat BN i ag 

hE oS & ME os % i RS Sh pe a oe 


4G’ Et yl 


¢And a sign for them is the dead land. We give it life, and We 
bring forth from it grains, so that they eat thereof. And We 
have made therein gardens of date palms and grapes, and We 
have caused springs of water to gush forth therein. So that they 
may eat of the fruit thereof — and their hands made it not. 
Will they not then give thanks?} (36:33-35). 


3600 4 ore re g)0 Lees 244 8 ane pee Coat te te by th cee ah 
Fas WS EL & 85 3 ul DAE g8 G5 we Ki 25 > 
ve Ate aege eet es tye Stone oe pares AEE ei ee tie Geshe oe 
65 it EE Se ee 5 He CS AS Oe 5 SENT 
Pag hess te sie pte 

S Ry ee ea Oa 


474. Then after that your hearts were hardened and became as 
stones or even worse in hardness. And indeed, there are stones 
out of which rivers gush forth, and indeed, there are of them 
(stones) which split asunder so that water flows from them, and 
indeed, there are of them (stones) which fall down for fear of 
Allah. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.> 


The Harshness of the Jews 


Allah criticized the Children of Israel because they witnessed 
the tremendous signs and the Aydt of Allah, including 
bringing the dead back to life, yet, 


<Then after that your hearts were hardened. 


So their hearts were like stones that never become soft. This 
is why Allah forbade the believers from imitating the Jews 
when He said, 


Stiraht 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1 263 
Bi Ne US GAS 05 at een hi GE A an oy Llp 
425 5 4G OE 8 INT AG 5G IS > LSI 


¢Has not the time come for the hearts of those who believe (in 
the Oneness of Allah — Islamic Monotheism) to be affected by 
Allah’s Reminder (this Qur'an), and that which has been 
revealed of the truth, lest they become as those who received the 
Scripture (the Tawrah) and the Injil (Gospel)) before (i.e. Jews 
and Christians), and the term was prolonged for them and so 
their hearts were hardened? And many of them were Fasiqun 
(the rebellious, the disobedient to Allah)> (57:16). 


In his Tafsir, Al-‘Awfi said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “When the 
dead man was struck with a part of the cow, he stood up and 
became more alive than he ever was. He was asked, ‘Who 
killed you?’ He said, ‘My nephews killed me.’ He then died 
again. His nephews said, after Allah took his life away, By 
Allah! We did not kill him’ and denied the truth while they 
knew it. Allah said, 


di 5 J sade gb 
<And became as stones or even worse in hardness>.”""| 


And by the passage of time, the hearts of the Children of 
Israel were unlikely to accept any admonishment, even after 
the miracles and signs they withnessed. Their hearts became 
harder than stones, with no hope of ever softening. 
Sometimes, springs and rivers burst out of stones, some 
stones split and water comes out of them, even if there are no 
springs or rivers around them, sometimes stones fall down 
from mountaintops out of their fear of Allah. Muhammad bin 
Ishaq narrated that ipo ‘Abbas said that, 


Kee G5 tit 2 ERG BA Sige ay AN 2, 3S5 US sol ie yy 
il ES ye Bg 


€And indeed, there are stones out of which rivers gush forth, and 
indeed, there are of them (stones) which split asunder so that water 
flows from them, and indeed, there are of them (stones) which fall 


0) at-Tabari 2:234. 


264 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


down for fear of Allah>, means, “Some stones are softer than 
your hearts, they acknowledge the truth that you are being 
called to, 
CES Ee yah, i 5 
€And Allah is not unaware of what you do.” 


Solid Inanimate Objects possess a certain Degree of 
Awareness 

Some claimed that the Aydt mentioned the stones being 
humble as a metaphor. However, Ar-Razi, Al-Qurtubi and 
other Imams said that there is no need for this explanation, 
because Allah creates this characteristic - humbleness - in 
stones. For instance, Allah said, 

0 Gi LA SG Jel ANG oss BEST cae gD 
«Truly, We did offer Al-Aminah (the trust) to the heavens and 
the earth, and the mountains, but they declined to bear it and 
were afraid of it (i.e. afraid of Allah's torment)» (33:72), 

Cini ts BM Ea Epa 1 
<The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein, glorify 
Him> (17:44), 
Chor Bebe petite 


¢And the stars and the trees both prostrate themselves (to 
Allah)> (55:6), 


Poy he woe 4 ca Cn Ca 1 Ce 
Sable HE ek om at GEC SS tN} 


¢Have they not observed things that Allah has created: (how) 
their shadows incline} (16:48), 


ing Gl Bap 
<They both said: ‘We come willingly.”’> (41:11), 
4S & MGI GS 5D 
€Had We sent down this Qur'an on a mountain} (59:21), and, 


O11 thn Abi Hatim 1:233. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (50 - 74) (Part-1 265 
aii Ca 6 Ee 24d 3 pay ud 
¢And they will say to their skins, “Why do you testify against 
us?” They will say: “Allah has caused us to speak.’’} (41:21). 
It is recorded in the Sahih that the Prophet #& said, 


92 Fe eh pe Mae Oe 
Gaons'y Loe, er ler 


oe) 


‘This (Mount Uhud) is a mount that loves us and that we love .»!"! 


Similarly, the compassion of the stump of the palm tree for 
the Prophet 3% as confirmed in authentic narrations. In Sahih 
Muslim it is recorded that the Prophet 3 said, 


ONS BY Gy Gal St gs giz le oe Be se SEV Gp 
a know a stone in Makkah that used to greet me with the 
Salam before 1 was sent. I recognize this stone now.»!?! 
He said about the Black Stone that, 


ciated 63i Gey pl gd eb Sp 


tOn the Day of Resurrection it will testifiy for those who kiss 
it 0!) 


There are several other texts with this meaning. The scholars 


of the Arabic language disagreed over the meaning of Allah’s 
statement, 


C555 SN Saeki pd 


And became as stones or even worse in hardness> after agreeing 
that ‘or’ here is not being used to reflect doubt. Some scholars 
said that ‘or’ here means, ‘and’. So the meaning becomes, “As 
hard as stones, and harder.” For instance, Allah said, 


468 He pe ED 
¢And obey not a sinner or a disbeliever among them> (76:24), 
and, 


oan Cad a oes 
Vibe J bse 


cz 


€. 


01 Fath ALBari 6:98. 
[21 Muslim 3:1782. 
{3} Ahmad 1 :266. 


266 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€To cut off all excuses or to warn} (77:6). 


Some other scholars said that ‘or’ here means, ‘rather’. 
Hence, the meaning becomes, ‘As hard as stones. Rather, 
harder.’ For instance, Allah said, 


Gese F5h te are cute costs cane BEG 
CaS ath Sat LET BON Se oes BS 1p 
A section of them fear men as they fear Allah or even more> 
(4:77), 
dcuhy at al wh dy Mcp 


€And We sent him to a hundred thousand (people) or even 
more> (37:147), and, 


45M Ft ae 8 Bp 
¢And was at a distance of two bows’ length or (even) nearer 
(53:9). 


Some other scholars said that this Ayah means their hearts 
are only of two types, as hard as stone or harder than stone. 
Further, Ibn Jarir commented that this Tafsir means that 
some of their hearts are as hard as stone and some hearts are 
harder than stone.") Ibn Jarir said that he favored this last 
Tafsir, although the others are plausible. I - Ibn Kathir - say 
that the last Tafsir is similar to Allah’s statement, 


466 BE oll yer lp 


<Their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire> 
(2:17), and then His statement, 


CCS Ss Ld i> 
<Or like a rainstorm from the sky> (2:19). 
It is also similar to Allah’s statement, 


rer 


Sieve A are as S ae 
458 SS ical ie. I> 


As for those who disbelieved, their deeds are like a mirage in a 
desert} (24:39), and then His statement, 


tA Zag B 


1) At-Tabari 2:236. 


Siirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 267 


<Or (the state of a disbeliever) is like the darkness in a vast 
deep sea> (24:40). 
This then means that some of them are like the first 


example, and some others are like the second example. Allah 
knows best. 


25 bye Mss Sb A hee 8805 645 35 OF iy KIL al Scctslp 
wet Sy pbs FE ys Gone YG Ga Gat 8 tse Als phy Sa 
Yl Sas SH KS ke oy CH Se Ol Sy pe sia Oe 

wots U5 73 uo Ale al FSi 
475. Do you (faithful believers) covet that they will believe in 
your religion inspite of the fact that a party of them (Jewish 
rabbis) used to hear the Word of Allah (the Tawrah), then they 


used to change it knowingly after they understood it?» 


¢76. And when they (Jews) meet those who believe (Muslims), 
they say, ‘We believe,”’ but when they meet one another in 
private, they say, “Shall you (Jews) tell them (Muslims) what 
Allah has revealed to you that they (Muslims) may argue with 
you (Jews) about it before your Lord?” Have you (Jews) then no 
understanding?> 


¢77. Know they (Jews) not that Allah knows what they conceal 
and what they reveal?» 


There was little Hope that the Jews Who lived during 
the Time of the Prophet % could have believed 


Allah said, 
5 nck > 
<Do you covet} O believers, 
IE SM 


<That they will believe in your religion> meaning, that these 
people would obey you? They are the deviant sect of Jews 
whose fathers witnessed the clear signs but their hearts 
became hard afterwards. Allah said next, 


4 


ach ect GA Se one Lacee oat, B oe 
dbp 8 3 al ie Ars HE G5 Ob 05> 


~ 


268 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


iMG \Y _ oe <Inspite of the fact that 
wine salts Cif | party of them (Jewish 
2) OARS Sid Sais plays rabbis) used to hear the 


pha BUIS EET gay 5 re oe, Word of Allah (the 
WA CAME RURAL Tawrah), then they used 

Ng recs s 20 Jost Bs YI to change it> meaning, 

SUE. Perrin fener eae 7574 Il distort its meaning, 


PRD ioe deme, Iie | eer 

B53 Latics Lamas here ¢after they understood 
AG ied it}. They understood 

well, yet they used to 


defy the truth, 
sks pts 


<knowingly>, being 
fully aware of their 
ORD erroneous 
rydiscithi554275 as interpretations and 
SLs So WEN be 658 corruption. This 
ine iget Gales statement is similar 
Bs fag - tr os 14, || to Allah’s statement, 
4 sENipnsiicallA es We cites oe be 
Act 4d. tis ce alts pepo Cpp 
a) iyo 35 5 Sas SLY Zo mass eieeen 


— 


gcoeagy ¢ vo) 
desealy 6 AEall yA 


¢So, because of their violation of their covenant, We cursed 
them and made their hearts grow hard. They change the words 
from their (right) places> (5:13). 


Qatadah commented that Allah’s statement; 
Cops hs le Us & Bare Shp 
€Then they used to change it knowingly after they understood it» 
“They are the Jews who used to hear Allah’s Words and then 
alter them after they understood and comprehended them.”?! 
Also, Mujahid said, “Those who used to alter it and conceal its 


(I Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :236. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1 269 


truths; they were their scholars.” Also, Ibn Wahb said that 
Ibn Zayd commented, 

¢used to hear the Word of Allah (the Tawrah), then they used to 
change it» “They altered the Tawrah that Allah revealed to them, 
making it say that the lawful is unlawful and the prohibited is 
allowed, and that what is right is false and that what is false is 
right. So when a person seeking the truth comes to them with a 
bribe, they judge his case by the Book of Allah, but when a 
person comes to them seeking to do evil with a bribe, they take 
out the other (distorted) book, in which it is stated that he is in 
the right. When someone comes to them who is not seeking 
what is right, nor offering them bribe, then they enjoin 
righteousness on him. This is why Allah said to them, 


ta BO eg 


420ohas SE Casi AAS 2h Kt gga ah AT aZllp 


¢Enjoin you Al-Birr (piety and righteousness and every act of 
obedience to Allah) on the people and you forget (to practise it) 
yourselves, while you recite the Scripture (the Tawrah)! Have 
you then no sense? (2:44)! 


The Jews knew the Truth of the Prophet +, but 
disbelieved in Him 


Allah said next, 
ja Sy pdt IE 15 ae BS awe Gall 10 ys> 
¢And when they (Jews) meet those who believe (Muslims), they say, 


“We believe’, but when they meet one another in private..>. 
Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas commented, 


4 36 bore GST 13S 15> 
€And when they (Jews) meet those who believe (Muslims), they say, 
“We believe’> “They believe that Muhammad 3 is the 


Messenger of Allah, ‘But he was only sent for you (Arabs)”"*! 
However, when they meet each other they say, “Do not convey 


 At-Tabari 2:245. 
(2) At-Tabari 2 :246. 
13! At-Tabari 2 :250 


270 ___Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


the news about this Prophet to the Arabs, because you used to 
ask Allah to grant you victory over them when he came, but he 
was sent to them (not to you).” Allah then revealed, 


abba ae 


Ey SATS os Sy pes SE yy ae BS Ue lt UB gap 

4555 Ke oy SHES KE 
¢And when they (Jews) meet those who believe (Muslims), they 
say, “We believe,” but when they meet one another in private, 
they say, “Shall you (Jews) tell them (Muslims) what Allah has 


revealed to you, that they (Muslims) may argue with you (Jews) 
about it before your Lord?’'> 


meaning, “If you admit to them that he is a Prophet, knowing 
that Allah took the covenant from you to follow him, they will 
know that Muhammad is the Prophet that we were waiting for 
and whose coming we find foretold of in our Book. Therefore, 
do not believe in him and deny him.” Allah said, 


4 OHS US Said Gl St ST Sty Val> 


¢Know they (Jews) not that Allah knows what they conceal and 
what they reveal?>. 


Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, “When the Jews met the believers 
they used to say, ‘We believe.’ When they met each other, 
some of them would say, ‘Do not talk to the companions of 
Muhammad about what Allah has foretold in your Book, so 
that the news (that Muhammad is the Final Messenger) does 
not become a proof for them against you with your Lord, and, 
thus, you will win the dispute.’”'! Further, Abu Al-‘Aliyah 
said about Allah’s statement, 

EGF 05 OAS GG tN Si V5t> 
¢Know they (Jews) not that Allah knows what they conceal and what 
they reveal?>, “Meaning their secret denial and rejection of 
Muhammad, 2 although they find his coming recorded in their 


Book.” This is also the Tafsir of Qatadah. Al-Hasan commented 
on, 


4d 6 LG it Sip 


() thn Abi Hatim 1:239. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarali (75 - 100) (Part-1 271 


That Allah knows what they concealy, “What they concealed 
refers to when they were alone with each other away from the 
Companions of Muhammad 3%. Then they would forbid each 
other from conveying the news that Allah revealed to them in 
their Book to the Companions of Muhammad 4, fearing that 
the Companions would use this news (about the truth of 
Muhammad 3) against them before their Lord.”!"! 


dist vo) 


¢And what they reveal?> meaning, when they said to the 
Companions of Muhammad 3, 


hed 
<We believe», as Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ and Qatadah stated.'?! 
ba Ge MN SHE Vy day Ol Vy Sis ets Os etd 
478. And there are among them (Jews) ‘Ummyyun (unlettered) 


people, who know not the Book, but they trust upon Amani 
(false desires) and they but guess.> 


€79. Then woe to those who write the book with their own 
hands and then say, “This is from Allah,” to purchase with it a 
little price! Woe to them for what their hands have written and 
woe to them for that they earn thereby .> 


The Meaning of ‘Ummi’ 
Allah said, 
isl sd 
<And there are among then Ummyyun peopley meaning, among 
the People of the Book, as Mujahid stated. Ummyyun, is plural 
for Ummi, that is, a person who does not write, as Abu Al- 


‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘, Qatadah, Ibrahim An-Nakhai and others said. 
This meaning is clarified by Allah’s statement, 


(1 thn Abi Hatim 1:240. 
21 thid. 


272 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
€i5SH pis Vp 
sie know not the Book> meaning, are they not aware of what is 
in it. 
Ummi was one of the descriptions of the Prophet #% because 
he was unlettered. For instance, Allah said, 


CSA OS MEG OS we HES 
<Neither did you (O Muhammad 3) read any book before it 
(this Qur'an) nor did you write any book (whatsoever) with 
your right hand. In that case, indeed, the followers of falsehood 
might have doubted> (29:48). 

Also, the Prophet #& said, 
test ¢ 


tee tate tt 508 ol ape fF obe tat 
WAKA; Kay Ka HE LA YG 2S Tt tp 


‘We are an Ummi nation, neither writing nor calculating. The 
(lunar) month is like this, this and this (i.e. thirty or twenty- 
nine days.»!?) 

This Hadith stated that Muslims do not need to rely on 


books, or calculations to decide the timings of their acts of 
worship. Allah also said, 


454 Yo SAM bg Ei al ap 
¢He it is Who sent among the Ummiyyin ones a Messenger 
(Muhammad #3) from among themselves} (62:2). 


The Explanation of Amani 
Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said that Allah’s statement, 
4th Vp 
<But they trust upon Amani> means, “It is just a false statement 
that they utter with their tongues.”*! It was also said that 
Amani means ‘wishes and hopes’. Mujahid commented, “Allah 


described the Ummiyyin as not understanding any of the Book 
that Allah sent down to Musa, yet they create lies and 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:241. 
[2] Fath ALBari 4:15). 
3] At-Tabari 2:261. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 273 


falsehood.”'! Therefore, the word Amdni mentioned here refers 
to lying and falsehood. Mujahid said that Allah’s statement, 
4558 Yh od Syd 


4And they but guessp means, “They lie.”?! Qatadah, Abu Al- 
‘Aliyah and Ar-Rabi‘ said that it means, “They have evil false 
ideas about Allah.”!*! 


Woe unto Those Criminals among the Jews 


Allah said, 
Para alee, tee te eae th Ko eee eo pte 2 te mere 
EES one WARES if we & NS SS SF ppl Csi SK SA Sod 


Gui 
<Then Waylun (woe) to those who write the book with thetr 
own hands and then say, “This is from Allah,’’ to purchase 
with it a little price!>. 


This is another category of people among the Jews who 
called to misguidance with falsehood and lies about Allah, 
thriving on unjustly amassing people’s property. ‘Waylun (woe)’ 
carries meanings of destruction and perishing, and it is a well- 
known word in the Arabic language. Az-Zuhri said that 
Ubadydullah bin ‘Abdullah narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “O 
Muslims! How could you ask the People of the Book about 
anything, while the Book of Allah (Qur’an) that He revealed to 
His Prophet 3% is the most recent Book from Him and you still 
read it fresh and young? Allah told you that the People of the 
Book altered the Book of Allah, changed it and wrote another 
book with their own hands. They then said, This book is from 
Allah,’ so that they acquired a small profit by it. Hasn’t the 
knowledge that came to you prohibited you from asking them? 
By Allah! We have not seen any of them asking you about what 
was revealed to you.” 41 This Hadith was also collected by Al- 
Bukhari.'*! Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, “The little amount here 


(1) At-Tabari 2 :262. 

[21 thn Abi Hatim 1:242. 

IS Tid. 

41 ton Abi Hatim 1:245. 

IS] Fath ALBari 5:244, 13:345 & 555. 


274 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


means this life and all that it contains.”!!! 
Allah’s statement, 
CHG BIG pA GC TL 

<Woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for 
that they earn therebyy means, “Woe to them because of what 
they have written with their own hands, the lies, falsehood and 
alterations. Woe to them because of the property that they 
unjustly acquired.” Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
commented, 


4Woe to them}, “Means the torment will be theirs because of the 
lies that they wrote with their own hands, 


C55 1G 6b isd 
¢And woe to them for that they earn thereby», which they unjustly 
acquired from people, be they commoners or otherwise.”!7! 


St Ge GB Ge Sf ne PEN Ls Oech Wy Seat ES sp 

di Als Yc BIG OM A ae 
<80. And they (Jews) say, ‘’The Fire shall not touch us but for 
a few numbered days.” Say (O Muhammad 2% to them): “Have 
you taken a covenant from Allah, so that Allah will not break 
His covenant? Or is it that you say of Allah what you know 
not?’’> 


The Jews hope They will only remain in the Fire for a 
Few Days 


Allah mentioned the claim of the Jews, that the Fire will only 
touch them for a few days, and then they will be saved from 
it. Allah refuted this claim by saying, 


442 if ee PRAT By 
<Say (O Muhammad 3 to them): “Have you taken a covenant from 


(1 tbn Abi Hatim 1:247. 
(21 at-Tabari 2:273. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) _ 275 


Allah?’>. Hence, the Ayah proclaims, ‘if you had a promise from 
Allah for that, then Allah will never break His promise. 
However, such promise never existed. Rather, what you say, 
about Allah, you have no knowledge of and you thus utter a lie 
about Him.’ Al-‘Awfi said that Ibn ‘Abbas said about the Ayah, 


dik Ost Vy eat 2S J ifs 


¢And they (Jews) say, ‘The Fire shall not touch us but for a 
few numbered days."’>. 


“The Jews said, The Fire will only touch us for forty days.’”!! 
Others added that this was the period during which the Jews 
worshipped the calf. 


Also, Al-Hafiz Abu Bakr bin Marduwyah reported Abu 
Hurayrah saying, 


2 ut 325 OG i es US ae it J) Sal nd 
CoS ih tae cae at 5 of SS 1 oy Sp OW Bs Je 
se SES S545 Shas ts 0b ST oy bis 230 Se JU 
SEIS 5 peti OG Ae: IMG cots IL bot Le site Y rH See 
ge jt Ua tan sae at 85 ot JUS a go Bye US Gls ig 
ly tgicdu AB Doh BOMB Ws UALS OF Noa Ud 38 ap 
Seed 38 egobe aif jar a at 5 i du Gl Uk pA 
ee GLEN odd 3 thee = a tpt ug: on: Ngli cate iia 
Si GW ES by Got ths eas ye SLs uh Jb a he 
Bai J 8 oy Oe a As 


«When Khaybar was conquered, a roasted poisoned sheep was 
presented to the Prophet 2 as a gift (by the Jews). The 
Messenger of Allah 38 ordered, ‘Assemble before me all the Jews 
who were here.’ The Jews were summoned and the Prophet 3% 
said (to them), ‘Who is your father?’ They replied, ‘So-and-so.’ 
He said, ‘You have lied; your father is so-and-so.’ They said, 
‘You have uttered the truth.’ He said, ‘Will you now tell me 
the truth, if I ask you about something?’ They replied, ‘Yes, O 


(11 At-Tabari 2:276. 


276 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Abul-Qasim ; and if we should tell a lie, you will know our lie 
as you have about our fathers.’ On that he asked, ‘Who are the 
people of the (Hell) Fire?’ They said, ‘We shall remain in the 
(Hell) Fire for a short period, and after that you will replace us 
in it.’ The Prophet # said, ‘May you be cursed and humiliated 
in it! By Allah, we shall never replace you in it.’ Then he 
asked, ‘Will you tell me the truth if I ask you a question?’ They 
said, ‘Yes, O Abul-Qasim.’ He asked, ‘Have you poisoned this 
sheep?’ They said, ‘Yes.’ He asked, ‘What made you do so?’ 
They said, ‘We wanted to know if you were a liar, in which 
case we would get rid of you, and if you were a Prophet then 
the poison would not harm you.’"| Imam Ahmad, Al- 
Bukhari and An-Nasa’i recorded similarly. '2! 


We oo MS el AG Mee 4 2h ae ow ys fod 
é weeee of - e “ ‘ EG < 

my oo dial ou ass Are BAI} iz (eae * eli Contos 
CHES 


481. Yes! Whosoever earns evil and his sin has surrounded 
him, they are dwellers of the Fire (i.e. Hell); they will dwell 
therein forever>. 


482. And those who believe and do righteous good deeds, they 
are dwellers of Paradise, they will dwell therein forever.> 


Allah says, the matter is not as you have wished and hoped 
it to be. Rather, whoever does an evil deed and abides 
purposefully in his error, coming on the Day of Resurrection 
with no good deeds, only evil deeds, then he will be among the 
people of the Fire. 


SSH (L35 os <ul> 
¢And those who believe and do righteous good deeds» meaning, 
“They believe in Allah and His Messenger #§ and perform the 
good deeds that conform with the Islamic Law. They shall be 


among the people of Paradise.” Allah said in a similar 
statement, 


0) pala’il An-Nubuwwah 4:256. 


(21 Ahmad 2:451, Fath AlL-Bdri 6:314, and An-Nasai in Al-Kubra 
6:413. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 277 


ot M4 YS oy 32 SS Seeall BI oti SS Ker, > 
Poe de < hyo oF 


or PAA CTY a CY : 
ryeey) RS 3 pes os GY KG A 3 De V5 5 abl 55 


oa 


Ciictas 560 VG Beit oka Sai 
it will not be in accordance with your desires (Muslims), nor 
those of the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians), 
whosoever works evil, will have the recompense thereof, and he 
will not find any protector or helper besides Allah. And 
whoever does righteous good deeds, male or female, and is a 
(true) believer [in the Oneness of Allah (Muslim)], such will 
enter Paradise and not the least injustice, even the size of a 
Nagira (speck on the back of a date stone), will be done to 
them> (4:123-124). 

Also, Abu Hurayrah, Abu Wa’il, ‘Ata’, and Al-Hasan said 
that, 


REELS og ELST D 


¢And his sin has surrounded him> means, “His Shirk (polytheism) 
has surrounded him.”!! Also, Al-A‘mash reported from’ Abu 
Razin that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Khuthaym said, 

SMES oy ELST 


¢And his sin has surrounded him}, “Whoever dies before repenting 
from his wrongs.”?! As-Suddi and Abu Razin said similarly.) 
Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas said that, 

CALS oy ELST 


¢And his sin has surrounded him} refers to major sins.) All of 
these statements carry similar meanings, and Allah knows 
best. 


When Small Sins gather, They bring about Destruction 
Here we should mention the Hadith that Imam Ahmad 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:252. 
2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:252. 
'3) fbn Abi Hatim 1:253. 
(41 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:253. 


278 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


recorded, in which ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad said that the 
Messenger of Allah 2 said, 


CE Fe JED ole Gait LEP Spill olay (Sep 
«Beware of the belittled sins, because they gather on a person 
until they destroy him.» 


He then said that the Messenger of Allah # gave them an 
example, 


ayllt tn Gib: geil pes sll g md pass 3G weil 133 3 ios 
gd 198 U1 AaiG 50 LAST bye Lace US tle tas 5 
(This is the example of people who set up camp on a flat land, 
and then their servants came. One of them collected some wood 
and another man collected some wood until they collected a 
great deal. They then started a fire and cooked what they put on 
ito! 
Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 
CEOS Go oh BS STi OS) cacti LZ ten Sal 


<And those who believe and do righteous good deeds, they are 
dwellers of Paradise, they will dwell therein forever> 


“Whoever believes in what you (Jews) did not believe in and 
implements what you refrained from implementing of 
Muhammad’s religion, shall acquire Paradise for eternity. Allah 
stated that the recompense for good or evil works shall remain 
with its people for eternity.”!?! 
Sail 635 cay Gals di Yy GUS ¥ oe we She ERA yp 
Vy 255 IS 2 Beh (n5 Gat ah ot Ct I weet pes 
re ANS Pe} SLs 


483. And (remember) when We took a covenant from the 
Children of Israel, (saying): Worship none but Allah (alone) 
and be dutiful and good to parents, and to kindred, and to 
orphans and (the poor), and speak good to people and perform 
As-Salah and give Zakah. Then you slid back, except a few of 


1] Ahmad 1:204. 
2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:254. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 279 


you, while you are backsliders.> 


The Covenant that Allah took from the Children of 
Israel 


Allah reminded the Children of Israel of the commandments 
that He gave them, and the covenants that He took from them 
to abide by those commands, and how they intentionally and 
knowingly turned away from all of that. Allah commanded 
them to worship Him and to associate none with Him in 
worship, just as He has commanded all of His creatures, for 
this is why Allah created them. Allah said, 


Chih OY Ah eh WS oe AS» cI 
¢And We did not send any Messenger before you (O 
Muhammad 23) but We revealed to him (saying): La ilaha illa 


Ana {none has the right to be worshipped but I (Allah)], so 
worship Me (alone and none else) (21:25), and, 


“ 7 yf Ob wee oe t os 4 tA 2 eee ont, 
donut Pte at hei ANS al Je] 9 CS ocyp 
¢And verily, We have sent among every Ummah (community, 


nation) a Messenger (proclaiming): ‘'Worship Allah (alone), 
and avoid the Taghiit (all false deities,)> (16:36). 


This is the highest and most important right, that is, Allah’s 
right that He be worshipped alone without partners. 

After that comes the right of the creatures, foremost, the 
right of the parents. Allah usually mentions the rights of the 
parents along with His rights. For instance, Allah said, 


€Znctl Gy Ah y ead o> 


<Give thanks to Me and to your parents. Unto Me is the final 
destination> (31:14). Also, Allah said, 


os 
or een fy eae 


EY SASS 2 Vy OLS STS 55> 


¢And your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him. 
And that you be dutiful to your parents> (17:23), until, 


43a OG GSI AGS Git 1S o> 


¢And give to the kinsman his due and to the Miskin (poor) and 
to the wayfarer> (17:26). 


280 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 

The Two Sahihs record that Ibn Mas‘id said, 

°Gi 6 25 gis ale Fotaune 5G ¢ pati est Gi ail 3,25 G 255 
tail fone a Slee JU eSh SF 26 a pauigh 3 08 

I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! What is the best deed?’ He 
said, ‘Performing the prayer on time.’ I said, ‘Then what?’ He 
said, ‘Being kind to one’s parents.’ I said, “Then what?’ He 
said, ‘Jihad in the cause of Allah.’s!") 

Allah then said, 


45> 


¢and to orphans» meaning, the young who have no fathers to 
fend for them. 


Rinses > 
¢and Al-Masakin (the poor)», plural for Miskin, the one who does 
not find what he needs to spend on himself and his family. We 
will discuss these categories when we explain the Ayah of Surat 
An-Nisd‘ where Allah said, 
4652) GAIL; CS oy KB 5 dt LEG 


a 


«Worship Allah and join none with Him (in worship); and do 
good to parents> (4:36). 


Allah’s statement, 
Ce 1 BSS) 
¢and speak good to people> meaning, say good words to them and 
be lenient with them, this includes commanding good and 


forbidding evil. Al-Hasan Al-Basri commented on Allah’s 
statement, 


de nt SD 
¢and speak good to peopley, “The good saying’ means 
commanding good and forbidding evil, and being patient and 
forgiving. The ‘good words to people’, as Allah commanded, also 


includes every good type of behavior that Allah is pleased 
with.”?] Imam Ahmad narrated that Abu Dharr said that the 


(1) Fath ALBari 6:5, and Muslim 1:89. 
[21 thn Abi Hatim 1:258. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 281 
Prophet 3% said, 
a ghts ty, SEA IU Aas Ai by GE Gye & bya 


«Do not belittle any form of righteousness, and even if you did 
not find any good deed except meeting your brother with a 
smiling face, then do so.» 


This Hadith was also collected by Muslim in his Sahih and 
At-Tirmidhi, who graded it Sahih.!"! 

Allah commands the servants to say good words to people, 
after He commanded them to be kind to them, thereby 
mentioning two categories of manners: good speech and good 
actions. He then emphasized the command to worship Him 


and the command to do good, ordaining the prayer and the 
Zakah, 

S91 es Blot abd 
qand perform As-Salah and give Zakah>. Allah informed us that 
the People of the Book, except for a few among them, ignored 
these orders, that is, they knowingly and intentionally 


abandoned them. Allah ordered this Ummah similarly in Surat 
An-Nisd’ when He said, 


SEN ENG AK a5 Coy TS ES oy ILS V5 at MEG) 
ESE 3 LS oh Taal Lat, wr JS, GN cs sat 

435 ICE See ge 24S dl fy sacs 
«Worship Allah and join none with Him (in worship); and do 
good to parents, kinsfolk, orphans, Al-Masakin (the poor), the 
neighbor who is near of kin, the neighbor who is a stranger, the 
companion by your side, the wayfarer (you meet), and those 


(servants) whom your right hands possess. Verily, Allah does 
not like such as are proud and boastful} (4:36). 


Of these orders, this Ummah has practiced what no other 
Henn before it has, and all praise is due to Allah. 


eal # Mies A Sf 2 V5 Mb, OS ¥ KGL, CET yp 
as rahe ot Kei aS S25 Kail OME Spe oH ine des 


(1) Ahmad 5:173, Muslim 4:2026, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 5:526. 


282 


Sp Sasi 


” sors ok tre a 
69 Does ites 
se bok tt A, 


2 OF I¢ 
Sa ese eles 


eer ferserd eo d 


ade 2 Seeaataccta 


L555, SSN seth EN EAL 
re CSN Sea NS Satis 


AGS, 
oMeiie datz meatoUanaah 3 
Kate AS JS Sikes jas 
Dae ee Renee iter ee 
sks CASI S 1 oN ts hae CS) Sy pa! 
ts thpe EP SxeSi5J 

eile Hic, 25Sacckay : 
JOD cis gs ASE Gp 
CDS BOSS co Bota ye BEC IS 


pata alt 


a2: 


aay 


Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Cit sere 


Atal py ea oll 3 
ius Si Ah fy is 
AD fe page GZ Jak 


E 


484. And (remember) 
when We took your 
covenant (saying): Shed 
not the blood of your 
(people), nor turn out 
your own people from 
their dwellings. Then, 


(this) you ratified and (to this) you bore witness .> 


€85. After this, it is you who kill one another and drive out a 
party of you from their homes, assist (their enemies) against 
them, in sin and transgression. And if they come to you as 
captives, you ransom them, although their expulsion was 
forbidden to you. Then do you believe in a part of the Book and 
reject the rest? Then what is the recompense of those who do so 
among you, except disgrace in the life of this world, and on the 
Day of Resurrection they shall be consigned to the most 
grievous torment. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.> 


486. Those are they who have bought the life of this world at 
the price of the Hereafter. Their torment shall not be lightened 


nor shall they be helped .> 


Stirah 2, Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 283 


The Terms of the Covenant and their Breach of It 


Allah criticized the Jews who lived in Al-Madinah during the 
time of the Messenger of Allah #%. They used to suffer, because 
of the armed conflicts between the tribes of Al-Madinah, Aws 
and Khazraj. Before Islam, the Aws and Khazraj worshipped 
idols, and many battles took place between them. There were 
three Jewish tribes in Al-Madinah at that time, Banu Qaynuqa‘ 
and Banu An-Nadir, the allies of the Khazraj, and Banu 
Qurayzah, who used to be the allies of the Aws. When war 
erupted between Aws and Khazraj, their Jewish allies would 
assist them. The Jew would kill his Arab enemy, and 
sometimes they also killed Jews who were the allies of the other 
Arab tribe, although the Jews were prohibited from killing each 
other according to clear religious texts in their Books. They 
would also drive each other from their homes and loot whatever 
furniture and money they could. When the war ended, the 
victorious Jews would release the prisoners from the defeated 
party, according to the rulings of the Tawrah. This is why Allah 
said, 

Knits GAs ISH atts SL ESND 
<Then do you believe in a part of the Scripture and reject the rest?> 
Allah said, 


45552 oe KOM 568 V5 Sikes 553 Y KGL, CHT 45> 


€And (remember) when We took your covenant (saying): Shed 
not the blood of your (people), nor turn out your own people 
from their dwellings .> 


meaning, “Do not kill each other, nor expel one another from 
their homes, nor participate in fighting against them.” Allah 
mentioned the word ‘your own’ here, just as He said in 
another Ayah. 


456 Se SIE KS Kel EE Kw Gy 5 
€So turn in repentance to your Creator and kill yourselves, that will 
be better for you with your Creator> (2:54) because the followers of 


one religion are just like one soul. Also, the Messenger of Allah 
# said, 


L SEEN U3} soe tgh acal Dj plolsis meer lss wale gb Scafalt ji 


284 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


CH) Salt acai bu O eit 52 & 
‘The example of the believers in their kindness, mercy and 
sympathy to each other is the example of one body, when an 


organ of it falls ill, the rest of the body rushes to its aid in fever 
and sleeplessness. i] Allah's statement, 


5,45 shih Bil Bp 
€Then, (this) you ratified and (to this) you bore witness.» means, 


“You testified that you know of the covenant and that you were 
witnesses to it.” 


days ok Kg GS SABI KOR OSU Sie i o> 
¢After this, it is you who kill one another and drive out a party of 


you from their homes». Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar reported 
that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on the Ayah, 


Giayds ob Ke Ca RBS Kei Os Nps 2D 
¢After this, it is you who a one another and drive out a party 
of you from their homes}'*! 


“Allah mentioned what they were doing, and that in the 
Tawraéh He had prohibited them from shedding each other’s 
blood, and required them to free their prisoners. Now they 
were divided into two camps in Al-Madinah, Banu Qaynuqa’‘, 
who were the allies of the Khazraj, and An-Nadir and 
Qurayzah, who were the allies of the Aws. When fighting 
erupted between Aws and Khazraj, Banu Qaynuqa‘ would fight 
along with the Khazraj, while Banu An-Nadir and Qurayzah 
would fight along with the Aws. Each Jewish camp would fight 
against their Jewish brethren from the other camp. They 
would shed each other’s blood, although they had the Tawrah 
with them, and they knew their rights and dues. Meanwhile, 
the Aws and Khazraj were polytheists who worshipped idols. 
They did not know about Paradise, the Fire, Resurrection, 
Divine Books the lawful and prohibited. When the war would 
end, the Jews would ransom their prisoners and implement 


(1) Muslim 4:1999. 
2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:261. 


Stirah 2, Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 285 


the Tawrah. Consequently, Banu Qaynuqa‘ would ransom their 
prisoners who were captured by the Aws, while Banu An-Nadir 
and Qurayzah would ransom their prisoners who were captured 
by the Khazraj. They would also ask for blood money. During 
these wars, they would kill whomever (Jews or Arabs) they 
could, while helping the polytheists against their brethren. 
Therefore, Allah reminded them of this when He said, 


Kitty RSS ASIF ying BUREN 


<Then do you believe in a part of the Scripture and reject the 
rest? > 


This Ayah means, ‘Do you ransom them according to the 
rulings of the Tawrah, yet kill them while the Tawrah forbade 
you from killing them and from expelling them from their 
homes? The Tawrah also commanded that you should not aid 
the polytheists and those who associate with Allah in the 
worship against your brethren. You do all this to acquire the 
life of this world.’ I was informed that the behavior of the Jews 
regarding the Aws and Khazraj was the reason behind 
revealing these Aydt.” 

These noble Aydt criticized the Jews for implementing the 
Tawrah sometimes and defying it at other times, although they 
believed in the Tawrah and knew what they were doing was 
wrong. This is why they should not be trusted to preserve or 
convey the Tawrah. Further, they should not be believed when 
it comes to the description of the Messenger of Allah x, his 
coming, his expulsion from his land, and his Hijrah, and the 
rest of the information that the previous Prophets informed 
them about him, all of which they hid. The Jews, may they 
suffer the curse of Allah, hid all of these facts among 
themselves, and this is why Allah said, 


CUE GSN Bie Wy peas aS Saks oF a1 CD 
<Then what is the recompense of those who do so among you, except 
disgrace in the life of this world, because they defied Allah’s Law 
and commandments, 
4s SS Sy hs a Ga 


¢And on the Day of Resurrection they shall be consigned to the most 
grievous torment? as punishment for defying the Book of Allah 


286 ; Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
that they had. 


CEG ChE S55 MAT Ga DE SS he yuh Ail vp 


¢And Allah is not unaware of what you do. Those are they who 
have bought the life of this world at the price of the Hereafter> 
meaning, they prefer this life to the Hereafter. Therefore, 


qoccat pee die Sp 


<Their torment shall not be lightened> not even for an hour, 


diypae od HP 
€Nor shall they be helped}, and they shall find no helper who will 
save them from the eternal torment they will suffer, nor shall 
they find any to grant them refuge from it. 


SN EF BN cae BS JOON oat be CS CAST oe CBr Gp 
AS GS piko Kl oe VG 45 Se UBS OM 6, Bah 

Ci ORE B55 
487. And indeed, We gave Miisé the Book and followed him up 
with a succession of Messengers. And We gave ‘Isa, the son of 
Maryam, clear signs and supported him with Riuh-il-Qudus. Is 
it that whenever there came to you a Messenger with what you 


yourselves desired not, you grew arrogant? Some you 
disbelieved and some you killed .> 


‘eM 


The Arrogance of the Jews who denied and killed Their 
Prophets 


Allah described the insolence of Children of Israel, their 
rebelliousness, defiance and arrogance towards the Prophets, 
following their lusts and desires. Allah mentioned that He gave 
Musa the Book, the Tawrah, and that the Jews changed, 
distorted, and defied its commands, as well as altered its 
meanings. 

Aliah sent Messengers and Prophets after Musa who followed 
his law, as Allah stated, 


36 Sab YL Sal opal y, Kates vib Ue Sol UD Gy 
€ aah ale tees oi Ty Heh OVEN Og 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 287 


<Verily, We did reveal the Tawrah (to Miisd), therein was 
guidance and light, by which the Prophets, who submitted 
themselves to Allah’s will, judged for the Jews. And the rabbis 
and the priests (too judged for the Jews by the Tawrah after 
those Prophets), for to them was entrusted the protection of 
Allah’s Book, and they were witnesses thereto> (5:44). This is 
why Allah said here, 


€325b ast b. Calis 
¢And Qaffayna him with Messengers>. 


As-Suddi said that Abu Malik said that Qaffaynd means, 
“Succeeded”! , while others said, “Followed". Both meanings 
are plausible, since Allah said, 


<Then We sent Our Messengers in succession> (23:44). 


Thereafter, Allah sent the last Prophet among the Children of 
Israel, ‘Isa the son of Mary, who was sent with some laws that 
differed with some in the Tawrah. This is why Allah also sent 
miracles to support ‘Isa. These included bringing the dead 
back to life, forming the shape of birds from clay and blowing 
into them, afterwhich they became living birds by Allah’s leave, 
healing the sick and foretelling the Unseen, as Ibn ‘Abbas 
stated.'71 Allah also aided him with Rah Al-Oudus, and that 
refers to Jibril. All of these signs testified to the truthfulness of 
IsA and what he was sent with. Yet, the Children of Israel 
became more defiant and envious of him and did not want to 
differ with even one part of the Tawrah, as Allah said about 
‘Isa, 

CES of HG Kites be Gt oll 3s el Ld 
¢And to make lawful to you part of what was forbidden to you, 
and I have come to you with a proof from your Lord} (3:50). 


Hence, the Children of Israel treated the Prophets in the 
worst manner, rejecting some of them and killing some of 
them. All of this occurred because the Prophets used to 


(1) thn Abi Hatim 1:268. 
12) Ihid. 


288 Tafsir _Ibn_ Kathir 


command the Jews with what differed from their desires and 
opinions. The Prophets also upheld the rulings of the Tawrah 
that the Jews had changed, and this is why it was difficult for 
them to believe in these Prophets. Therefore, they rejected the 
Prophets and killed some of them. Allah said, 


Kh 55 BST GS Armes Gl wt VG S25 See Chlp 


Is it that whenever there came to you a Messenger with what 
you yourselves desired not, you grew arrogant? Some you 
disbelieved and some you kill}. 


Jibril is Rah Al-Qudus 


The proof that Jibril is the Ruh Al-Qudus is the statement of 
Ibn Mas‘id in explanation of this Ayah."! This is also the 
view of Ibn ‘Abbas, Muhammad bin Ka‘b, Isma‘l bin Khalid, 
As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, ‘Atiyah Al-‘Awfi and Qatadah.!?! 
Additionally, Allah said, 


Cyl & 684 AFG WAT Gol 4 Hp 


«Which the trustworthy Ruh (Jibril) has brought down. Upon 
your heart (O Muhammad #8) that you may be (one) of the 
warners? (26:193-194). 


Al-Bukhari recorded ‘A’ishah saying that the Messenger of 
Allah 2% erected a Minbar in the Masjid on which Hassan bin 
Thabit (the renowned poet) used to defend the Messenger of 
Allah #3 (with his poems). The Messenger of Allah #¢ said, 


WS 32 AiG US dat 24 Sues UT abn 


tO Allah! Aid Hassan with Rih Al-Qudus, for he defended 

Your Prophet .»!3) 

Abu Dawud recorded this Hadith in his Sunan'*! as did At- 
Tirmidhi who graded it Hasan Sahih. '*! Further, Ibn Hibban 
recorded in his Sahih that Ibn Mas‘id said that the Prophet 3% 
said, 

(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:269. 

(21 fbn Abi Hatim 1:270. 

(3) Fath Al-Bari 10 :562. 

4) Abu Dawud 5:279. 

15) Tyhfat ALAhwadhi 8 :137. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1 289 


Hb oo baths ar 120 
«Rah Al-Qudus informed me that no soul shall die until it 


finishes its set provisions and term limit. Therefore, have Taqwa 
of Allah and seek your sustenance in the most suitable way .0'”! 


The Jews tried to kill the Prophet 


Az-Zamakhshari commented on Allah’s statement, 


see £ ee 


COKE B55 AM Op 


Some you disbelieved and some you kill>, “Allah did not say 
‘killed’ here, because the Jews would still try to kill the Prophet 
in the future, using poison and magic.” During the illness that 
preceded his death, the Prophet 2 said, 


«l kept feeling the effect of what I ate (from the poisoned sheep) 
during the day of Khaybar, until now, when it is the time that 
the aorta will be cut off (meaning when death is near) .»!?! 


This Hadith was collected by Al-Bukhari and others!*! 
CSREES pa KK Ot ed yy Bi Gy agp 


488. And they say, ‘Our hearts are Ghulf.’” Nay, Allah has 
cursed them for their disbelief, so little is that which they 
believe .> 


Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 
iE CE 5d 


¢And they say, ‘Our hearts are Ghulf.’">, means, “Our hearts are 
screened.”*) Mujahid also said that, 


ehie GH 35> 


11! See As-Sunnah 14 :304. 
2) bn ‘Adi 3:1239. 

(3) Fath AL-Bari 7 :737. 

14] at-Tabari 2:326. 


290 Tafsir _Ibn Kathir 


And they say, “Our hearts are Ghulf.”>, means, “They are 
covered.”'! Ikrimah said, “There is a stamp on them.”?! Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah said, “They do not comprehend.”*! Mujahid and 
Qatadah said that Ibn ‘Abbas read the Ayah in a way that 
means, “Our hearts contain every type of knowledge and do not 
need the knowledge that you (O Muhammad) have.”*) This is 
the opinion of ‘Ata’ and Ibn ‘Abbas. 


tandk, HS 

¢Nay, Allah has cursed them for their disbelief> meaning, “Allah 
expelled them and deprived them of every type of 
righteousness.” Qatadah said that the Ayah, 

4638 6 Susp 
4So little is that which they believe.» means, “Only a few of them 
believe.”5! Allah’s statement, 

qh C4 5p 
€And they say, “Our hearts are Ghulf.”> is similar to His 
statement, 


44) GEG feo 3 Gb G> 
€And they say: “Our hearts are under coverings (screened) 
from that to which you invite us> (41:5). 


This is why Allah said here, 
4b CSB pad, ted > 
<Nay, Allah has cursed them for their disbelief, so little is that 
which they believe .> 
meaning, “It is not as they claim. Rather, their hearts are 


cursed and stamped,” just as Allah said in Surat An-Nisd’ 
(4:155), 


45 Vy SAS SG pl Ge Ole SEE EE nyhs> 


(tid. 

[7] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:274. 
(3! thn Abi Hatim 1: 273. 
41 Al-Qurtubi. 

(5! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:274. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 291 


¢And of their saying: “Our hearts are wrapped (with 
coverings, i.e. we do not understand what the Messengers 
say)” — nay, Allah has set a seal upon their hearts because of 
their disbelief, so they believe not but a little .> 


There is a difference of opinion regarding the meaning of 
Allah’s statement, 


ih Cd 
4So little is that which they believe.» and His statement, 

455 Vy SL SY 
¢So they believe not except a few». Some scholars said that the 
Ayat indicate that a few of them would believe, or that their 
faith is minute, because they believe in Resurrection and in 
Allah’s reward and punishment that Musa foretold. Yet, this 
faith will not benefit them since it is overshadowed by their 
disbelief in what Muhammad 3% brought them. Some scholars 


said that the Jews did not actually believe in anything and that 
Allah said, 


4555 & up 


ory 


4So little is that which they believe>, meaning, they do not believe. 
This meaning is similar to the Arabic expression, “Hardly have | 
seen anything like this,” meaning, “I have never seen anything 
like this.” 


SMG Spt SS on BG ed Sit ait ae EO BL Cp 

4 Gepki | df OG 2, Wass igre G be Cb 
€89. And when there came fo them (the Jews), a Book (this 
Quran) from Allah confirming what is with them (the Tawrah) 
and the Injil (Gospel), although aforetime they had invoked 
Allah (for the coming of Muhammad 23) in order to gain 
victory over those who disbelieved, then when there came to 
them that which they had recognised, they disbelieved in it. So 
let the curse of Allah be on the disbelievers.> 


The Jews were awaiting the Prophet’s coming, but They 
disbelieved in Him when He was sent 


Allah said, 


292 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€ chile Cp 

¢And when there came 
to them? meaning, the 
Jews, 

dail we HS} 

¢a Book from Allah> 
meaning, the Qur’an 
that Allah sent down 
to Muhammad, 


Coes Ch Gicat> 
¢confirming what is 
with them> meaning, 
the Tawrah. Further, 
Allah said, 

KF Lp SS x 13G> 
qi ai 
although aforetime they 


had invoked Allah (for 
coming of Muhammad 


Keach 
rte ACE (35% oes SE Sys 
Oc Kia Awd Ciba lys z pre 

Si Canty eve Ae gcalea GE Shuck, 


“°0) 


KejelliSes i stots 


Headey aes 
Pane WUD Axess i 
pAb oe StH Bat) 
hee A bate OO anh 
Dh has ed aalies ais 
ra Spb pa 1855 SOE AEST: 315 
ee rane Rovenis yc teats : 
papas taliey 26.31h,% 
On} 2 Sy Ritchey Satthcrcct, 3, ||) in order to gain 
victory over those who 


disbelieved> meaning, before this Messenger came to them, they 
used to ask Allah to aid them by his arrival, against their 
polytheistic enemies in war. They used to say to the polytheists, 
“A Prophet shall be sent just before the end of this world and 
we, along with him, shall exterminate you, just as the nations 
of ‘Ad and Iram were exterminated.” Also, Muhammad bin 
Ishaq narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The Jews used to invoke 
Allah (for the coming of Muhammad 3%) in order to gain victory 
over the Aws and Khazraj, before the Prophet #% was sent. 
When Allah sent him to the Arabs, they rejected him and 
denied what they used to say about him. Hence, Mu‘adh bin 
Jabal and Bishr bin Al-Bara’ bin Ma‘rar, from Bani Salamah, 
said to them, ‘O Jews! Fear Allah and embrace Islam. You used 
to invoke Allah for the coming of Muhammad 2% when we were 
still disbelievers and you used to tell us that he would come 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 293 


and describe him to us,’ Salam bin Mushkim from Bani An- 
Nadir replied, ‘He did not bring anything that we recognize. He 
is not the Prophet we told you about.’ Allah then revealed this 
Ayah about their statement, 


ji Bice ae Ga SES phe CD 


4And when there came to them (the Jews), a Book (this Qur'an) 
from Allah confirming what is with them (the Tawrah) and the 
Injil (Gospel)p.” 1"! 

Abu Al-‘Aliyah said, “The Jews used to ask Allah to send 
Muhammad 3% so that they would gain victory over the Arab 
disbelievers. They used to say, ‘O Allah! Send the Prophet that 
we read about - in the Tawrah - so that we can torment and 
kill the disbelievers alongside him.’ When Allah sent 
Muhammad 2% and they saw that he was not one of them, they 
rejected him and envied the Arabs, even though they knew that 
he was the Messenger of Allah. Hence, Allah said, 


4epKN J A OG a, eee ise Gaels ED 


<Then when there came to them that which they had 
recognized, they disbelieved in it. So let the curse of Allah be 
on the disbelievers>.”'*! 


BAW uw “it nye ol ie ait ES w taco ay Ry pel iy Wat uc > 
490. How bad is that for which they have sold their own selves, 
that they should disbelieve in that which Allah has revealed (the 
Qur'an), grudging that Allah should reveal of His grace unto 
whom He wills of His servants. So they have drawn on 
themselves wrath upon wrath. And for the disbelievers, there is 
disgracing torment .> 


Mujahid said, 
4c goal wa, REL ua > 
¢How bad is that for which they have sold their own selves}, “The 


(1) At-Tabari 2:333. 
[2] thn Abi Hatim 1: 276. 


294 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 


Jews sold the truth for falsehood and hid the truth about 
Muhammad 3%.”'! As-Suddi said that the Ayah, 


<4 ney 74 Weir uh > 


¢<How bad is that for which they have sold their own selves? means, 
“The Jews sold themselves.”*! meaning, what is worse is what 
they chose for themselves by disbelieving in what Allah revealed 
to Muhammad 2% instead of believing, aiding and supporting 
him. This behavior of theirs is the result of their injustice, envy 
and hatred, 


Make de US AE hs ce IIE op 
égrudging that Allah should reveal of His grace unto whom He wills 
of His servants>.” There is no envy worse than this. Therefore, 


4558 Ky GD 


<So they have drawn on themselves wrath upon wrath». Ibn ‘Abbas 
commented on this Ayah, “Allah became angry with them 
because they ignored some of the Tawrah and disbelieved in the 
Prophet that He sent to them.”*! I (Ibn Kathir) say that the 
meaning of, 


Ei yeep 


<And they drew on themselvesy is that they deserved and 
acquired multiplied anger. Also, Abu Al-‘Aliyah said, “Allah 
became angry with them, because of their disbelief in the Injil 
and ‘Isa and He became angry with them again, because they 
disbelieved in Muhammad # and the Qur’én.”*) Similar was 
said by Tkrimah and Qatadah.!5! Allah said, 


dings 21S GAKI5> 


¢And for the disbelievers, there is disgracing torment>. Since their 
disbelief was a result of their transgression and envy, which 
was caused by arrogance, they were punished with disgrace 


( At-Tabari 2:340, 

2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:277. 
(3! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:279. 
41 Ton Abi Hatim 1:278. 
{51 ton Abi Hatim 1:279. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagaralt (75 - 100) (Part-1 295 


and humiliation in this world and the Hereafter. Similarly, 
Allah said, 


ding AE GEIS Site & YK all Yd 


<Verily, those who scorn My worship (i.e. do not invoke Me, and do 
not believe in My Oneness) they will surely enter Hell in 
humiliation!’"y (40:60) meaning, “Disgraced, degraded and 
humiliated.” Imam Ahmad narrated that ‘Amr bin Shu‘ayb said 
that his father said that his grandfather said that the Prophet 
said, 
So nap BS BME oN op Sa ST sath G5 Sy Zech Ge 
PG NUNC Ie Ie ees te ae eat 
eG JET sled JUAN Eb 


‘The arrogant people will be gathered on the Day of 
Resurrection in the size of ants, but in the shape of men. 
Everything shall be above them, because of the humiliation 
placed on them, until they enter a prison in Jahannam called 
‘Bawlas’ where the fire will surround them from above. They 
shall drink from the puss of the people of the Fire .»!"! 


s “ 
saa ae wea 


BBS FS ey Siwy a pty Sb NG ot SA ae 8 td 
Bend AS 4 Go a HOE Se he Sl 

CBE LG as be Sat BIS SI et phd 15 
491. And when it is said to them (the Jews), ‘Believe in what 
Allah has sent down,” they say, ‘We believe in what was sent 
down to us.” And they disbelieve in that which came after it, 
while it is the truth confirming what is with them. Say (O 
Muhammad 3 to them): “Why then have you killed the 
Prophets of Allah aforetime, if you indeed have been 
believers?”’> 


¢92. And indeed Musa came to you with clear proofs, yet you 
worshipped the calf after he left, and you were Zalimiin .> 


I'l Ahmad 2:179. 


296 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Although The Jews denied the Truth, They claimed to 
be Believers! 


Allah said, 


4a 5a typ 
¢And when it is said to them>, meaning, the Jews and the People 
of the Book, 
eit FS Gy Shae > 
«Believe in what Allah has sent down> to Muhammad 3x, believe 
in and follow him, 
tL Jel & 53 iup 


«They say, “We believe in what was sent down to us.”’> meaning, it 
is enough for us to believe in what was revealed to us in the 
Tawrah and the Injil, and this is the path that we choose, 


pay ey Syph5> 
€And they disbelieve in that which came after it>. 
dps Bit Sit sp 
while it is the truth confirming what is with them} meaning, while 
knowing that what was revealed to Muhammad 3, 


it is the truth confirming what is with them>. This means that 
since what was sent to Muhammad # conforms to what was 
revealed to the People of the Book, then this fact constitutes a 
proof against them. Similarly, Allah said, 


Cpa Sb OS KBs CSS aN Salt 
<Those to whom We gave the Scripture (Jews and Christians) 


recognize him (Muhammad 3%) as they recognize their sons> 
(2:146). Allah said next, 


oases 
2 


4nd! ES oy 5S ox BACH ARE wp 
<Why then have you killed the Prophets of Allah aforetime, if 
you indeed have been believers?’’>. 
This means, “If your claim that you believe in what was 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 297 


revealed to you is true, then why did you kill the Prophets 
who came to you affirming the Tawrah’s Law, although you 
knew they were true Prophets? You killed them simply out of 
transgression, stubbornness and injustice with Allah’s 
Messengers. Therefore, you only follow your lusts, opinions 
and desires.” iets Allah said, 


KOiE 55 BE OS Akal Cal oe Vu, Io5 Me Chlp 
4ls it that whenever tere came to you a Messenger with what 
you yourselves desired not, you grew arrogant? Some you 
disbelieved and some you killed. > 


. Also, As-Suddi said, “In this Ayah, Allah chastised the 
People of the Book, 


4a ES of SS on SH RES 


<Say (O Muhammad x3 to them): “Why then have you killed 
the Prophets of Allah aforetime, if you indeed have been 
believers?”’y."" 


4S oot Lede aig 
¢And indeed Musa came to you with clear proofs> meaning, with 
clear signs and clear proofs that he was the Messenger of Allah 
and that there is no deity worthy of worship except Allah. The 
clear signs -or miracles- mentioned here are the flood, the 
locusts, the lice, the frogs, the blood, the staff and the hand. 


Musa’s miracles also include parting the sea, shading the Jews 
with clouds, the manna and quails, the gushing stone, etc. 


<i Zid 
<yet you worshipped the calfp meaning, as a deity instead of 
Allah, during the time of Musa. Allah’s statement, 
€2a% Led 
dafter he left> after Masa went to Mount Tur to speak to Allah. 
Similarly, Allah said, 


£4 o ° o ~ 
q53 4 ice Tne mee ie oh be ee PS SBb> 


¢And the people of Musa made in his absence, out of their 


([) fbn Abi Hatim 1:281. 


298 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


ornaments, the image of a calf (for worship). It had a sound (as 
if it was mooing)> (7:148). 


Spas Bis 
qand you were Zalimiin> meaning, you were unjust in this 


behavior of worshipping the calf, although you knew that there 
is no deity worthy of worship except Allah. Similarly, Allah said, 


Sais oh ey Di YE Ls BUS peal a ke G&D 
Civigatll ce Ses 
¢And when they regretted and saw that they had gone astray, 
they (repented and) said: “If our Lord have not mercy upon us 
and forgive us, we shall certainly be of the losers’’> (7:149). 


WG Tach 5, katte GL Sut CESS eta KEL. CAST 5p 
PY ay pearly ENS pany Salt tysld 3 Uy Chass ez 
¢93. And (remember) when We took your covenant and We 
raised above you the Mount (saying), “Hold firmly to what We 
have given you and hear (Our Word).” They said, “We have 
heard and disobeyed.’ And their hearts absorbed (the worship 


of) the calf because of their disbelief. Say: ‘Worst indeed is that 
which your faith enjoins on you if you are believers.”’> 


The Jews rebel after Allah took Their Covenant and 
raised the Mountain above Their Heads 


Allah reminded the Jews of their errors, breaking His 
covenant, transgression and defiance, when He raised Mount 
Tur above them so that they would believe and agree to the 
terms of the covenant. Yet, they broke it soon afterwards, 


” 


qiass Cae ING 


<They said, “We have heard and disobeyed .’"» We have mentioned 
the Tafsir of this subject before. ‘Abdur-Razzaq said that 
Ma‘mar narrated that Qatadah said that, 


Ciajdey Sat Aye dd 3 ftp 
€And their hearts absorbed (the worship of) the calf» means, “They 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1 299 


absorbed its love, until its love resided in their hearts.”'! This 
is also the opinion of Abu Al-‘Aliyah and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas.|?! 
Allah’s statement, 


kt AE oy Ky ry eaits uh, Sp 


<Say: ‘Worst indeed is that which your faith enjoins on you if you 
are believers.”"> means, “Worse yet is the manner in which you 
behaved in the past and even now, disbelieving in Allah’s Aydt 
and defying the Prophets. You also disbelieved in Muhammad 
#, which is the worst of your deeds and the harshest sin that 
you committed. You disbelieved in the Final Messenger and the 
master of all Prophets and Messengers, the one who was sent 
to all mankind. How can you then claim that you believe, while 
committing the evil of breaking Allah’s covenant, disbelieving in 
Allah’s Ayat and worshipping the calf instead of Allah?” 


* g 4 Bde Boe § 4 ae o ce ne 4 vet 

BG HO GH ASF AL UA Cat os Se & Atl Hi 

OA Ses BG ES QA Se ht 

€94. Say to (them): “If the abode of the Hereafter with Allah is 

indeed for you especially and not for others of mankind, then 
long for death if you are truthful.’’> 


€95. But they will never long for it because of what their hands 
have sent before them (i.e. what they have done). And Allah is 
Aware of the Zalimin .> 


€96. And verily, you will find them (the Jews) the greediest of 
mankind for life and (even greedier) than those who ascribe 
partners to Allah. One of them wishes that he could be given a 
life of a thousand years. But the grant of such life will not save 
him even a little from (due) punishment. And Allah is Seer of 
what they do.> , 


"I ‘Abdur-Razzaq 1:52. 
(2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:283. 


Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
\o eB Calling the Jews to 


(03 SITE cK.) § ll imvoke Allah to 

Wee SY ea OBL Ss 

re - ettyte-s jc , | destroy the Unjust 

Soo SSE tilings Party 

2404 oh erste LR sesrce Fe 

ai) pep heateltoy pes Muhammad bin 

“oh 450,35, || Ishaq narrated that 

ei ar 5@ Ibn ‘Abbas said, 

SAY SSY Ceo ary Pen EY yal | “Allah said to His 

Se cere gtr r srs &% teter Pro het he | 

SOL ian ih A ass, pTOPBe 


ag : 12 47 {oe 487 7 Se 4. wm 14% o 
MI LAE 17, Bh died G48 OK 


. 
» > owe 


oo 


o 


Mul pea EK oy UD 


~% ¢ 54 ge Gee 
09d ot ASSE ail ee 3557 


. tet tee Ae be oe Othe wd 
Serj Wossjsci mata nti | o eee 
to E30 AAACD: of j3J Ve: wll 

pq | ae 


a eo edhe) 9280 z 405, B55 365 af 
dened es 4 ae i oe Oe” ve 4 o 5 RE OA 
TAS G3 5 eK 5 ei OG KS . 
Gack ctefne boeyeom cor ye 24, || CSay to (them): “If the 
ico Repyaen WY, RAVES SSeS AN | home of the Hereafter 
opief ve sree aacrts oct ane te -¢ | with Allah is indeed for 
re SN tsps ae bee Leas you especially and not 
al pce, Pre ipespe ices COLE for others, of mankind, 
“ACU A tee 8 cen oseriei hes | then long for death if 
CES 35 9h Sra G3 US ica% 

“<2 aad os cee oe aa you are — truthful.’’> 
DOA hee Bal slice meaning, ‘Invoke 
Allah to bring death 
to the lying camp 
among the two (Muslims and Jews).’ The Jews declined this 
offer by the Messenger of Allah 3.”!!! 


ad 


ies ae is ty ah Sol ey EN GLE SSD 


<But they will never long for it because of what their hands 
have sent before them (i.e. what they have done). And Allah is 
Aware of the Zalimin (polytheists and wrongdoers) .> 


meaning, “Since they know that they recognize you, and yet 
disbelieve in you.” Had they wished death that day, no Jew 
would have remained alive on the face of the earth. Moreover, 
Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


([) tpn Abi Hatim 1:284. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) 301 


de aap 


<Then long for death>, means, “Invoke (Allah) for death.”"! Also, 
‘Abdur-Razzaq narrated that ‘Ikrimah said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
commented, 


45 Bes 


<Then long for death if you are truthful>, “Had the Jews invoked 
Allah for death, they would have perished.”!! Also, Ibn Abi 
Hatim recorded Sa‘d bin Jubayr saying that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
“Had the Jews asked for death, one of them would have choked 
on his own saliva.”°! These statements have authentic chains 
of narration up to Ibn ‘Abbas. Further, Ibn Jarir said in his 
Tafsir, “We were told that the Prophet # said, 


ial GF gy gO Se dete Gig YAS Sach ys sgh SF she 

YG YG WG Ses V1 te) a a 525 5, bY 
«Had the Jews wished for death, they would have died and seen 
their seats in the Fire. And, those who invoked such curse 
against Allah’s Messenger would have found no families or 
property had they returned to their homes».”\4| 


Similar to this Ayah is Allah’s statement in Strat Al- 
Jumu‘ah, 
ol SHES CO os y A al KI 235 ot he alt Cy Sp 


4 


GO are te este ue Gy tk th Th age sty oe Ao Wc eff 
Sh eh Oi as Hy 3 peak Mb oe Gall Sil 
053s A 


€(Say (O Muhammad #3): “O you Jews! If you pretend that 
you are friends of Allah, to the exclusion of (all) other mankind, 
then long for death if you are truthful.”But they will never 
long for it (death), because of what (deeds) their hands have 
sent before them! And Allah knows well the Zalimin. Say (to 


"I at-Tabari 2:366. 
2] fbn Abi Hatim 1:285. 
13! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:284. 
4] At-Tabari 2:362. 


302 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


them): “Verily, the death from which you flee will surely meet 
you, then you will be sent back to (Allah) the Knower of the 
unseen and the seen, and He will tell you what you used to 
do." (62:6-8). 

So they claimed that they are Allah’s sons and loved ones 
and said, “Only those who are Christian or Jews shall enter 
Paradise.” Therefore, they were called to invoke Allah to 
destroy the lying group, be it them or the Muslims. When the 
Jews declined, every one was sure of their wrong, for had they 
been sure of their claims, then they would have accepted the 
proposal. Their lies were thus exposed after they declined the 
offer to invoke the curse. 

Similarly, the Messenger of Allah 2 called a delegation of 
Najran’s Christians to curse after he refuted them in a debate 
in which they demonstrated stubbornness and defiance. Allah 
said, 

tae SoG; CEI EG LS Ge a ES 
‘gion: ies 


ie ; we oe So 4 ted % Ss bey, 
qi wicgxeall Je at Sis sats JAG 2 Koy ca Sais; 


<Then whoever disputes with you concerning him (‘Isd) after 
(all this) knowledge that has come to you (i.e. ‘Isa) being a 
servant of Allah, and having no share in divinity), say (O 
Muhammad 33): ‘Come, let us call our sons and your sons, 
our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves — then 
we pray and invoke (sincerely) the curse of Allah upon those 
who lie.“"> (3:61). 


When the Christians heard this challenge, some of them said 
to each other, “By Allah! If you do such with this Prophet, 
none of you will have an eye that blinks.” This is when they 
resorted to peace and gave the Jizyah (tax) in disgrace. The 
Prophet #% accepted the Jizyah from them and sent Abu 
‘Ubaydah bin Al-Jarréh with them as a trustee. Similar to this 
meaning is Allah’s command to His Prophet # to proclaim to 
the polytheists: 


i Sa TSS ML Bg KB 
<Say (O Muhaniunad 2%) whoever is in error, the Most 
Gracious (Allah) will prolong him (in it).> (19:75) 
meaning, “Whoever among us has deviated, may Allah increase 


Surah 2. Al-Baqarah (75 - 100) (Part-1 303 


and prolong his deviation.” We will mention this subject later, 
Allah willing. 

The Mubdhalah (invocation to Allah to destroy the liars) was 
called a ‘wish’ here, because every just person wishes that 
Allah destroy the unjust opponent who is debating with him, 
especially when the just person has a clear, apparent proof for 
the truth he is calling to. Also, the Mubdhalah involves 
invoking Allah for death of the unjust group, because to 
disbelievers, life is the biggest prize, especially when they know 
the evil destination they will meet after death. 


Disbelievers wish They could live longer 
This is ed Allah said next, 
& wl Sl i andls So nll pe 2a 5 eal 5% a IA 832255 pad 5 hb> 
$355 


4But they will never long for it because of what their hands 
have sent before them (i.e.what they have done). And Allah is 
Aware of the Zalimin. And verily, you will find them (the 
Jews) the greediest of mankind for life.> 


meaning, greedy to live longer, because they know their evil 
end, and the only reward they will have with Allah is total 
loss. This life is a prison for the believer and Paradise for the 
disbeliever. Therefore, the People of the Book wish they could 
delay the Hereafter, as much as possible. However, they shall 
certainly meet what they are trying to avoid, even if they are 
more eager to delay the Hereafter than the polytheists who do 
not have a divine book. 
Muhammad bin Ishaq narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on, 


4723 J NN Se cnhSs 5h Up 
€But the grant of such life will not save him even a little from 
(due) punishment. > 


“Long life shall not save them from torment. Certainly, the 
polytheists do not believe in resurrection after death, and they 
would love to enjoy a long life. The Jews know the humiliation 
they will suffer in the Hereafter for knowingly ignoring the 
truth.”! Also, ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, “The 


(11 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:288. 


304 Tafsir_lbn Kathir 


Jews are most eager for this life. They wish they could live for 
a thousand years. However, living for a thousand years will 
not save them from torment, just as Iblis’ - Satan - long life 
did not benefit him, due to being a disbeliever.”""! 


Ser anne Treas “85> 


4And Allah is Seer of what hey it meaning, “Allah knows what 
His servants are doing, whether good or evil, and will 
compensate each of them accordingly.” 


BERG Git i ok, AG & AD BS Lal Ge OE & 
SS Doses 4255 easy SOM OE A en 1885 ds 
4: ry a So ail 432 ait 2% 
€97. Say (O Muhammad #3): “Whoever is an enemy to Jibril 
(Gabriel) (let him die in his fury), for indeed he has brought it 
(this Qur'an) down to your heart by Allah’s permission, 
confirming what came before it (i.e. the Tawrih and the Injil) 
and guidance and glad tidings for the believers}. 
498. “Whoever is an enemy to Allah, His Angels, His 


Messengers, Jibril and Mika’il, then verily, Allah is an enemy 
to the disbelievers ."’> 


The Jews are the Enemies of Jibril 


Imam Abu Ja‘far bin Jarir At-Tabari said, “The scholars of 
Tafsir agree that this Ayah (2: 97-98) was revealed in response 
to the Jews who claimed that Jibril (Gabriel) is an enemy of 
the Jews and that Mika’l (Michael) is their friend.”! Al- 
Bukhari said, “Allah said, 

thigh WE ED 
«Whoever is an enemy of Jibril (let him die in his fury)>. Tkrimah 
said, “Jibr, Mik and Isrdf all mean, worshipper, while 11 means, 
Allah”. Anas bin Malik said, “When ‘Abdullah bin Salam heard 
of the arrival of the Prophet # in Al-Madinah, he was working 


on his land. He came to the Prophet # and said, I am going to 
ask you about three things which nobody knows except a 


I) At-Tabari 2:376. 
[2] At-Tabari 2:377. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagaralt (75 - 100) (Part-1 305 


Prophet. What will be the first portent of the Hour? What will 
be the first meal taken by the people of Paradise? Why does a 
child resemble its father, and why does it resemble its maternal 
uncle?’ Allah’s Messenger # said, ‘Jibril has just told me the 
answers.» ‘Abdullah said, ‘He (i.e. Jibril), among all the angels, is 
the enemy of the Jews.’ Allah’s Messenger 34 recited the Ayah, 


rey 


CAG fe AF BE Lied 522 SE sd 


Whoever is an enemy to Jibril (Gabriel) (let him die in his 
fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur’an) down to your 
heart>. 


Allah’s Messenger 2 then said, ‘The first portent of the Hour will 
be a fire that will bring together the people from the east to the west; 
the first meal of the people of Paradise will be the caudate lobe of the 
liver of fish. As for the child resembling his parents: If a man has 
sexual intercourse with his wife and his discharge is first, the child 
will resemble the father. If the woman has a discharge first, the child 
will resemble her side of the family.» On that ‘Abdullah bin Salam 
said, 1 testify that there is no deity worthy of worship except 
Allah and you are the Messenger of Allah.’ ‘Abdullah bin Salam 
further said, ‘O Allah’s Messenger! The Jews are liars, and if 
they should come to know about my conversion to Islam before 
you ask them (about me), they will tell a lie about me.’ The 
Jews came to Allah’s Messenger #, and ‘Abdullah went inside 
the house. Allah’s Messenger 3% asked (the Jews), «What kind of 
man is ‘Abdullah bin Salam?’) They replied, ‘He is the best among 
us, the son of the best among us, our master and the son of 
our master.’ Allah’s Messenger # said, ‘What do you think if he 
would embrace Islam?) The Jews said, ‘May Allah save him from 
it.’ Then ‘Abdullah bin Salam came out in front of them saying, 
{ testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and 
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.’ Thereupon they 
said, ‘He is the evilest among us, and the son of the evilest 
among us.’ And they continued talking badly about him. Ibn 
Salam said, This is what I feared, O Messenger of Allah!.’” Only 
Al-Bukhari recorded this Hadith with this chain of narration, "! 

Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded this Hadith from Anas using 


(1 Fath Al-Bari 8:15 & 7:319. 


306 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


another chain of narration,!") 

Some people say that ‘il’ means worshipper while whatever 
word that is added to it becomes Allah’s Name, because ‘i’ is 
a constant in such conjunction. This is similar to the names 
‘Abdullah, ‘Abdur-Rahm4an, ‘Abdul-Malik, ‘Abdul-Quddus, 
‘Abdus-Salam, ‘Abdul-Kafi, ‘Abdul-Jalil, and so forth. Hence, 
‘Abd’ is constant in these compound names, while the 
remainder differs from name to name. This is the same case 
with Jibril, Mika’, ‘Azra’, Israfil, and so forth. Allah knows 
best. 


Choosing Some Angels to believe in over Others is 
Disbelief like choosing Some Prophets over Others 


Allah said, 
dail oh, AB FAT AE bil Ge OE > 
«Whoever is an enemy to Jibril (Gabriel) (let him die in his 


fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur'an) down to your 
heart by Allah's permission ,> 


meaning, whoever becomes an enemy of Jibril, let him know 
that he is Rih Al-Qudus who brought down the Glorious Dhikr 
(Qur’an) to your heart from Allah by His leave. Hence, he is a 
messenger from Allah. Whoever takes a messenger as an 
enemy, will have taken all the messengers as enemies. 
Further, whoever believes in one messenger, is required to 
believe in all of the messengers. Whoever rejects one 
messenger, he has rejected all of the messengers. Similarly, 
Allah said, ; 
SB OAKS ts MGS S Soli atts db OG oa Ap 


<Verily, those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and 

wish to make distinction between Allah and His Messengers (by 

believing in Allah and disbelieving in His Messengers) saying, 

“We believe in some but reject others.’’> (4:150) 

Allah decreed that they are disbelievers, because they 
believe in some Prophets and reject others. This is the same 


"1 Sahih Al-Bukhari 3329, 3911, 3938, and Muslim 315. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (75 - 100) (Part-1) _ __ 307 


with those who take Jibril as an enemy, because Jibril did not 
choose missions on his own, but by the command of his Lord, 


455 cL My EE > 


4And we (angels) descend not except by the command of your 
Lord> (19:64), and, 
i all & 35 OES we GAT el 4 Baraat S J sd 


> 


¢And truly, this (the Qur'an) is a revelation from the Lord of 
all that exists. Which the trustworthy Riih (fibril) has brought 
down. Upon your heart (O Muhammad 23) that you may be 
(one) of the warners> (26:192-194). 


Al-Bukhari reported that Abu Hurayrah said that the 
Messenger of Allah 3% said, 
ok 2550 38 Os Ys 
‘Allah said, ‘Whoever takes a friend of Mine as an enemy, will 
have started a war with Me.0""! 
Therefore, Allah became angry with those who took Jibril as 
an enemy. Allah said, 
465 Se GS ail oh, AE & AF AP did He OE > 


«Whoever is an enemy to Jibril (Gabriel) (let him die in his 
fury), for indeed he has brought it (this Qur’an) down to your 
heart by Allah’s permission, confirming what came before it> 
meaning, the previous Books, 


-Gae 


SSH 65 Say 
dand guidance and glad tidings for the believers» meaning, as 
guidance to their hearts and bringer of the good news of 
Paradise, which is exclusively for the believers. Similarly, Allah 
said, 
Cass 5 ate Saslt BD 


€Say: “It is for those who believe, a guide and a healing.’’> 
(41:44), and, 


(1) Fath Al-Bari 11:348. 


308 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


2 3 Deere ye ck oe ober ed 
Kid) ty tlhe AG HT & Sy 


€And We send down of the Qur‘an that which is a healing and 
a mercy to those who believe} (17:82). 


Allah then said, 
€SeaK Be BOG KS eis atts neat & We OF 
<Whoever is an enemy to Allah, His Angels, His Messengers, 
Jibril and Mika’il (Michael), then verily, Allah is an enemy to 
the disbelievers .> 
Allah stated that whoever takes Him, His angels and 
messengers as enemies, then,..Allah’s messengers include 
angels and men, for Allah said, 


anole 
SUN 


Cini 5 SE ET Se tes I 


Allah chooses Messengers from angels and from men> (22:75). 
Allah said, 


€3:Kn5 Sued 


<Jibril (Gabriel) and Mika’il (Michael)>. Allah mentioned Jibril and 
Mika'll specifically - although they are included among the 
angels who were messengers - only because this Ayah was 
meant to support Jibril the emissary between Allah and His 
Prophets. Allah also mentioned Mika’il here, because the Jews 
claimed that Jibril was their enemy and Mika’l was their 
friend. Allah informed them that whoever is an enemy of either 
of them, then he is also an enemy of the other as well as Allah. 
We should state here that Mikal sometimes descended to some 
of Allah’s Prophets, although to a lesser extent than Jibril, 
because this was primarily Jibril’s task, and Israfil is entrusted 
with the job of blowing the Trumpet for the commencement of 
Resurrection on the Day of Judgment. It is recorded in the 
Sahih that whenever the Messenger of Allah 2 would wake up 
at night, he would supplicate, 


a We 2M St bE Jay Goh date 25 abe 

8 EN gah OBES 5 LSE LG Botte Sg BE CT sudan 
tpi Bliwe SHS fr sad ot uly Gal 5 

‘O Allah, Lord of Jibrit, Mika’il and Israfil, Creator of the heavens 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 309 


and earth and Knower of the seen and the unseen! You judge 
between Your servants regarding what they differ in, so direct me to 
the truth which they differ on, by Your leave. Verily, You guide 
whom You will to the straight path.»!"! 

Allah’s statement, 


52255 522 al O1G> 


<then verily, Allah is an enemy to the disbelievers> informed the 
disbelievers that whoever takes a friend of Allah as an enemy, 
then he has taken Allah as an enemy, and whoever treats Allah 
as an enemy, then he shall be Allah’s enemy. Indeed, whoever 
is an enemy of Allah then he will lose in this life and the 
Hereafter, as stated earlier; 


wt al ae 5 w Sale byt 
‘Whoever takes a friend of Mine as an enemy, I shall wage war 
on him 0!) 

“2 eng kh 2 Gy te tee yor we ee - 77, este 
Wigs Cleat Sadi Wy & 2S uy Say Ow A aes 
a ace US \ 
Ow parsgh city at a LESH BS Gt 53 2 55 a ad Sica 
5 ose ee os BL ie & ogc YE Ue Hops J 
5 yes Sah IG pea & St AM AR Sfis we Lec bi 
4 BS Oe Spi MS es 8 OV Sg okt 
M5 abi 0 Sykes; ‘St all Yi ci y pi Ss 
aa EG ASS GE ee eH g We ON yi ls Td Geeks 
J 4 He EE SG be NG Me ee pal 

Ec Sls OF 
€99. And indeed We have sent down to you manifest Ayat and 
none disbelieve in them but Fasiqun (those who rebel against 
Allah's command).> 


€100. Is it not (the case) that every time they make a covenant, some 


eee 
be Y 
an SN 
fA 
OF, 
(\ 
& 
[va 
aa 
eS 
we 
ae 
&& 


(1) Muslim 1:534. 
[2] Fath Al-Bari 11:348. 


310 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 
iN WV bs party among them throw 
“be ee 4 2 eel asct cet; | if aside? Nay! (the truth 
5 Te HE le Et ASST oct it aside ay! 1 
7 oe ee & Ne is een is:) most of them believe 
PENS AGL Sh NSIS BL | not > 
Serta se 4% 4a, oe ot 
Sah East MG ELIT EINE Al €101. And when there 
breeches ore Rg Ae ge -G> seteyee |] came to them a Messen- 
PSV LOY 9 > polis yllses ger from Allah (i.e. Mu- 
Shonda gles 99 jaa 2445 ALES |] hammad #8) confirming 
: A what was with them, a 
party of those who were 
given the Scripture threw 
away the Book of Allah 
behind their backs as if 
they did not know!> 


€102. They followed 
what the Shaydtin (dev- 
ils) gave out (falsely of 
the magic) in the lifetime 
of Sulayman (Solomon). 
Sulayman did not disbe- 
ber wc ee ee & ge ate, = || lieve, but the Shayatin 
HERB SG ALIA | (devils) disbelieved, 
poled jail Ryiirpiaxnawer 55, || teaching men magic and 
ons —__ ii such things that came 
down at Babylon to the 
fwvo angels, Hart and Marit, but neither of these two (angels) taught 
anyone (such things) till they had said, ‘We are for trial, so disbelieve 
not (by learning this magic from us). And from these (angels) people 
learn that by which they cause separation between man and his wife, 
but they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah's leave. And 
they learn that which harms them and profits them not. And indeed 
they knew that the buyers of it (magic) would have no share in the 
Hereafter. And how bad indeed was that for which they sold their own 
selves, if they but knew.> 


€103. And if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil and 
kept their duty to Allah, far better would have been the reward from 
their Lord, if they but knew!» 


¢ gteerrl seo 5. whe 
Bplay sil oSLy VON sen 


Toe 
> 7 


OAS Ae ING gaa At tots 

Ajab AGE es Vigan 
~~ 4, ee es Ss ie 

22k At of ’ Age as i 

a AS QHoAIne3 gaat 


ap PRE Mace 555 MIGAG 
Sarisesi Aes itn SGU 
@ Lic a peal hc hus 
ESRI SST 5 BMG 


‘~ 7 
ee] 


sr-4 < 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 311 
Proofs of Muhammad’s Prophethood 


Imam Abu Ja‘far bin Jarir said that Allah’s statement, 
S55 eh Gy GAS yp 

¢And indeed We have sent down to you manifest Ayat> means, “We 
have sent to you, O Muhammad, clear signs that testify to your 
prophethood.” These Aydt are contained in the Book of Allah 
(Qur’an) which narrates the secrets of the knowledge that the 
Jews possess, which they hid, and the stories of their earlier 
generations. The Book of Allah also mentions the texts in the 
Books of the Jews that are known to only the rabbis and 
scholars, and the sections where they altered and distorted the 
rulings of the Tawrah. Since Allah mentioned all of this in His 
Book revealed to His Prophet Muhammad 3, then this fact 
alone should be enough evidence for those who are truthful 
with themselves and who wish to avoid bringing themselves to 
destruction due to envy and transgression. Further human 
instict testifies to the truth that Muhammad 3 was sent with 
and the clear signs that he brought which he did not learn or 
acquire from mankind. Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said 
that, 


4255 ests Gh Chl ap 
And indeed We have sent down to you manifest Aydt? means, 
“You recite and convey this Book to them day and night, 
although you are an Ummi (unlettered) who never read a book. 
Yet, you inform them of what they have (in their own Books). 
Allah stated that this fact should serve as an example, a clear 
sign and a proof against them, if they but knew.”!"! 


The Jews break Their Covenants 


When the Messenger of Allah #% was sent and Allah reminded 
the Jews of the covenant that they had with Him, especially 
concerning Muhammad 3%, Malik bin As-Sayf said, “By Allah! 
Allah never made a covenant with us about Muhammad, nor 
did He take a pledge from us at all.” Allah then revealed, 


Bt 972 gor 


ies 35 555 sage age Cleasl> 


"M At-Tabari 2:397. 


312 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Is it not (the case) that every time they make a covenant, some 
party among them throw it aside?>'"! Al-Hasan Al-Basri said 
that Allah’s statement, 


CER IBS 5 


<Nay! (the truth is:) most of them believe not> means, “There is 
not a promise that they make, but they break it and abandon 
it. They make a promise today and break it tomorrow.’!! 


The Jews abandoned the Book of Allah and practiced 
Magic 


As-Suddi commented on, 
7 3 Be ze ee 7 ot NK, + 
pga Ul oh if ace 53 J,t5 chee 1ci5> 


¢And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah (i.e. 
Muhammad 22) confirming what was with them>, 


“When Muhammad 4 came to them, they wanted to contradict 
and dispute with him using the Tawrah. However, the Tawrah 
and the Qur’an affirmed each other. So the Jews gave up on 
using the Torah, and took to the Book of Asaf,!9! and the magic 
of Harait and Martat, which indeed did not conform to the 
Qur’an. Hence Allah’s statement, 


4s ¥ peed 
€As if they did not know!»."| 
Also, Qatadah said that Allah’s statement, 


45s 9 Ele 


¢As if they did not know!> means, “They knew the truth but 


abandoned it, hid it and denied the fact that they even had 
it." 


(1 At-Tabari 2:400. 

2] thn Abi Hatim 1:295. 

3] Lisan Al-Arab lists Asaf as the name of the Book revealed to the 
Prophet Sulayman, peace be upon him. See also the explanation 
that follows. 

41 at-Tabari 2 :404. 

IS! Thid. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 313 
Magic existed before Sulayman (Solomon) 
As-Suddi said that Allah’s statement, 


Cin it & Suc BE c 3G> 


<They followed what the Shayatin (devils) gave out (falsely of 
the magic) in the lifetime of Sulayman} 


means, “During the time of Prophet Solomon.’ Beforehand, the 
devils used to ascend to heaven and eavesdrop on the 
conversations of the angels about what will occur on the earth 
regarding death, other incidents or unseen matters. They 
would convey this news to the soothsayers, and the 
soothsayers would in turn convey the news to the people. The 
people would believe what the soothsayers told them as being 
true. When the soothsayers trusted the devils, the devils 
started to lie to them and added other words to the true news 
that they heard, to the extent of adding seventy false words to 
each true word. The people recorded these words in some 
books. Soon after, the Children of Israel said that the Jinns 
know matters of the Unseen. When Solomon was sent as a 
Prophet, he collected these books in a box and buried it under 
his throne; any devil that dared get near the box was burned. 
Solomon said, 1 will not hear of anyone who says that the 
devils know the Unseen, but I will cut off his head.’ When 
Solomon died and the scholars who knew the truth about 
Solomon perished, there came another generation. To them, 
the devil materialized in the shape of a human and said to 
some of the Children of Israel, ‘Should I lead you to a treasure 
that you will never be able to use up?’ They said. ‘Yes.’ He 
said, ‘Dig under this throne,’ and he went with them and 
showed them Solomon’s throne. They said to him, ‘Come 
closer.’ He said, ‘No. I will wait for you here, and if you do not 
find the treasure then kill me.’ They dug and found the buried 
books, and Satan said to them, ‘Solomon only controlled the 
humans, devils and birds with this magic.’ Thereafter, the 
news that Solomon was a sorcerer spread among the people, 
and the Children of Israel adopted these books. When 
Muhammad #% came, they disputed with him relying on these 
books. Hence Allah’s statement, 


AES Sy bi 3655 Bei Jaze up 


314 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<Sulaymin did not disbelieve, but the Shayatin (devils) 
disbelieved>.!"! 


The Story of Harit and Marit, and the Explanation that 
They were Angels 
Allah said, 
SBS, Ve SO ols ws bs Ss Se Heel & Ii top 
¢And such things that came down at Babylon to the two 
angels, Harit and Marit, but neither of these two (angels) 
taught anyone (such things) till they had said, “We are for 
trial, so disbelieve not (by learning this magic from us)."" And 
from these (angels) people learn that by which they cause 
separation between man and his wife}. 
There is a difference of opinion regarding this story. It was 
said that this Ayah denies that anything was sent down to the 
two angels, as Al-Qurtubi stated and then referred to the Ayah, 


Ci Fedo Lisp 
<Sulayman did not disbelievey saying, “The negation applies in 
both cases. Allah then said, 


Kell & Sf ts AM AM Sls WT Cacl ISI5> 
<But the Shayatin (devils) disbelieved, teaching men magic and 
such things that came down at Babylon to the two angels}. 


The Jews claimed that Gabriel and Michael brought magic 
down to the two angels, but Allah refuted this false claim.”!! 

Also, Ibn Jarir reported, that Al-‘Awfi said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
said about Allah’s statement, 


4515, death & i vod 
<And such things that came down at Babylon to the two angels> 


“Allah did not send magic down.”**! 
Also, Ibn Jarir narrated that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said about, 


(') at-Tabari 2:405. 
2} Al-Ourtubi 2:50. 
IS! At-Tabari 2:419. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagaralt (101 - 124) (Part-1) 315 
dial & Sp top 
¢And such things that came down to the two angels>, “Allah did not 


send magic down to the them.”"! Ibn Jarir commented, “This 
is the correct explanation for this Ayah. 
€5LL lt & Sut 1S c iaGp 
€They followed what the Shayatin (devils) gave out (falsely) in 
the lifetime of Sulayman .> 


meaning, magic. However, neither did Solomon disbelieve nor 
did Allah send magic with the two angels. The devils, on the 
other hand, disbelieved and taught magic to the people of the 
Babylon of Harat and Marit.” 
Ibn Jarir continued; “If someone asks about explaining this 
Ayah in this manner, we say that, 
CSck oh F Sweh Hc 5p 
They followed what the Shayatin (devils) gave out (falsely) in 
the lifetime of Sulayman .> 


means, magic. Solomon neither disbelieved nor did Allah send 
magic with the two angels. However, the devils disbelieved and 
taught magic to the people in the Babylon of Harat and 
Marat, meaning Gabriel and Michael, for Jewish sorcerers 
claimed that Allah sent magic by the words of Gabriel and 
Michael to Solomon, son of David. Allah denied this false claim 
and stated to His Prophet Muhammad # that Gabriel and 
Michael were not sent with magic. Allah also exonerated 
Solomon from practicing magic, which the devils taught to the 
people of Babylon by the hands of two men, Harut and Marit. 
Hence, Harat and Marit were two ordinary men (not angels or 
Gabriel or Michael).”?) These were the words of At-Tabari, and 
this explanation is not plausible. 

Many among the Salaf, said that Hardt and Marat were 
angels who came down from heaven to earth and did what 
they did as the Ayah stated. To conform this opinion with the 
fact that the angels are immune from error, we say that Allah 
had eternal knowledge what these angels would do, just as He 


"I At-Tabari 2:419. 
2) tid. 


316 | Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


had eternal knowledge that Iblis would do as he did, while 
Allah refered to him being among the angels, 


Gif cal, WSS FI kl aKa CB Yop 
<And (remember) when We said to the angels: ‘Prostrate 


yourselves before Adam.” And they prostrated except Iblis 
(Satan), he refused> (20:116) 


and so forth. However, what Hart and Marat did was less evil 
than what Iblis, may Allah curse him, did. Al-Qurtubi reported 
this opinion from ‘Ali, Ibn Mas‘td, Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn ‘Umar, Ka‘b 
Al-Ahbar, As-Suddi and Al-Kalbi.!"! 


Learning Magic is Kufr 
Allah said, 


<But neither of these two (angels) taught anyone (such things) 
till they had said, “We are for trial, so disbelieve not (by 
learning this magic from us) .> 


Abu Ja‘far Ar-Razi said that Ar-Rabi’ bin Anas said that 
Qays bin ‘Abbaéd said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “When someone 
came to the angels to learn magic, they would discourage him 
and say to him, We are only a test, so do not fall into 
disbelief.’ They had knowledge of what is good and evil and 
what constitutes belief or disbelief, and they thus knew that 
magic is a form of disbelief. When the person who came to 
learn magic still insisted on learning it, they commanded him 
to go to such and such place, where if he went, Satan would 
meet him and teach him magic. When this man would learn 
magic, the light (of faith) would depart him, and he would see 
it shining (and flying away) in the sky. He would then 
proclaim, ‘O my sorrow! Woe unto me! What should I do?.”"21 
Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that this Ayah means, “The angels 
were sent with magic, so that the people whom Allah willed 
would be tried and tested. Allah made them promise that they 
would not teach anyone until first proclaiming, ‘We are a test 


(1 al-Qurtubi 2:51. 
(21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:312. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 317 


for you, do not fall into disbelief.’ It was recorded by Ibn 
Abi Hatim. Also, Qatadah said, “Allah took their covenant to 
not teach anyone magic until they said, ‘We are a test. 
Therefore, do not fall in disbelief.’”!! 

Also, As-Suddi said, “When a man would come to the two 
angels they would advise him, ‘Do not fall into disbelief. We 
are a test.’ When the man would ignore their advice, they 
would say, ‘Go to that pile of ashes and urinate on it.’ When 
he would urinate on the ashes, a light, meaning the light of 
faith, would depart from him and would shine until it entered 
heaven. Then something black that appeared to be smoke 
would descend and enter his ears and the rest of his body, 
and this is Allah’s anger. When he told the angels what 
happened, they would teach him magic. So Allah’s statement, 


{But neither of these two (angels) taught anyone (such things) 
till they had said, “We are for trial, so disbelieve not (by 
learning this magic from us) .>'°) 


Sunayd said that Hajjaj said that Ibn Jurayj commented on 
this Ayah (2:102), “No one dares practice magic except a 
disbeliever. As for the Fitnah, it involves trials and freedom of 
choice.”*! The scholars who stated that learning magic is 
disbelief relied on this Ayah for evidence. They also mentioned 
the Hadith that Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar recorded from ‘Abdullah, 
which states, 

Wg i ye Isha, 6 18 bw Sid ee of Ge 
‘Whoever came to a soothsayer or a sorcerer and believed in 
what he said, will have disbelieved in what Allah revealed to 
Muhammad 3.0!°) 

This Hadith has an authentic chain of narration and there 
are other Hadiths which support it. 


(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:310 
2! At-Tabari 2:443 

IS! At-Tabari 2:443. 

4] hid. 

IS! Kashaf Al-Astar 2 :443. 


318 ; Tafsir_Ibn_Kathir 


Causing a Separation between the Spouses is One of the 
Effects of Magic 


Allah said, 
Kisii SN GG ay CoBsS CGE SET 


¢And from these (angels) people learn that by which they cause 
separation between man and his wife,> 


This means, “The people learned magic from Hardt and Marut 
and indulged in evil acts that included separating spouses, 
even though spouses are close to, and intimately associate 
with each other. This is the devil’s work.” Muslim recorded 
that Jabir bin ‘Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah 3 
said, 


oe 2 og 


Uj ate rel il gle bats beth le chs Aad Sth Sp 


5G 34S Bish ty hE Ste aly Vy dd ls 

Si by thy its Shad dU al 3a eg I 
Satan erects his throne on water and sends his emissaries 
among the people. The closest person to him is the person who 
causes the most Fitnah. One of them (a devil) would come to 
him and would say, ‘I kept inciting so-and-so, until he said 
such and such words.’ Iblis says, ‘No, by Allah, you have not 
done much.’ Another devil would come to him and would say, 
‘I kept inciting so-and-so, until I separated between him and his 
wife.’ Satan would draw him closer and embrace him, saying, 
‘Yes, you did well .‘»!") 


Separation between a man and his wife occurs here because 
each spouse imagines that the other spouse is ugly or ill- 
mannered, etc. 

Allah’s Appointed Term supercedes Everything 

Allah said, 


Yi 2SN Se aay Gol och USP 


1) Muslim 4 :2167. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 319 


<But they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah’s leavey. 
Sufyan Ath-Thawri commented, “Except by Allah’s appointed 
term.”"! Further, Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that, 

C0 35k, Vy ASN ny ily gh wD 
€But they could not thus harm anyone except by Allah's leavep 
means, “Allah allows magicians to adversely affect whomever 
He wills and saves whomever He wills from them. Sorcerers 
never bring harm to anyone except by Allah’s leave.”?! Allah’s 
statement, 

Cees V5 ehh ts wc Byles» 

€And they learn that which harms them and profits them not.> 
means, it harms their religion and does not have a benefit 
compared to its harm. 


458 Se ei g AU OK situs i5p 
¢And indeed they knew that the buyers of it (magic) would have no 
(Khalaq) share in the Hereafter.» meaning, “The Jews who 
preferred magic over following the Messenger of Allah # knew 
that those who commit the same error shall have no Khalag in 
the Hereafter.” Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid and As-Suddi stated that 


‘no Khalaq’ means, ‘no share.**! 
Allah then said, 


Gish ian Nh Sl ee I GC we HE ES > 
€And how bad indeed was that for which they sold their own 
selves, if they but knew. And if they had believed and guarded 
themselves from evil and kept their duty to Allah, far better 


would have been the reward from their Lord, if they but 
knew!>. Allah stated, 


€ait> 


<And how bad> meaning, what they preferred, magic, instead of 
faith and following the Messenger, if they but comprehend the 


"1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:312. 
[21 ton Abi Hatim 1:311. 
3! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:314. 


320 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


advice. 
45S A ace 55 BES WG igs vel SD 
€And if they had believed and guarded themselves from evil and 
kept their duty to Allah, far better would have been the reward 
from their Lord,> 
meaning, “Had they believed in Allah and His Messenger 3 
and avoided the prohibitions, then Allah’s reward for these good 
deeds would have been better for them than what they chose 
and preterres for themselves.” Similarly, Allah said, 


Beh Gs hs oe FE AG pees LI BT all Sicas> 

dbl Fy 
<€But those who had been given (religious) knowledge said: 
“Woe to you! The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is better 
for those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and this 
none shall attain except As-Sabiriin (the patient in following the 
truth).”’> (28:80). 


Ee Sees [ooo Gul ay es ESV Ue eal Caled 
& pak J I ol SSS) CAST ON Sa om 34 6 mad 
Cris pail JT 3 iG A oF gt Le BG Sa of 


€104. O you who believe! Say not (to the Messenger 2) es ind 
but say Unzurnd (make us understand) and hear. And for the 
disbelievers there is a painful torment. 


4105. Neither those who disbelieve among the People of the 
Scripture (Jews and Christians) nor Al-Mushrikin (the idolaters) 
like that there should be sent down unto you any good from 
your Lord. But Allah chooses for His mercy whom He wills. 
And Allah is the Owner of great bounty.> 


Manners in Speech 


Allah forbade His believing servants from imitating the 
behavior and deeds of the disbelievers. The Jews used to use 
devious words that hide what they really meant. May Allah’s 
curse be upon them. When they wanted to say, ‘hear us,’ they 
would use the word Rd‘ind, which is an insult (in Hebrew, but 
means ‘hear us’ in Arabic). Allah said, 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 321 
gE GS hes Le BIS aaa 2 BIT S552 LG OA cad 

A is 3 GG got CE ce NG et Stl g Cy a ALIE OF ess 

C855 TBS S AG HS SS SH 
<Among those who are Jews, there are some who displace words 

from (their) right places and say: “We hear your word (O 

Muhammad 3%) and disobey,” and “Hear and let you (O 

Muhammad #%) hear nothing.” And Ra‘ind with a twist of 

their tongues and as a mockery of the religion (Islam). And if 

only they had said: ‘We hear and obey,” and “Do make us 
understand,” it would have been better for them, and more 
proper; but Allah cursed them for their disbelief, so they believe 

not except a few> (4:46). 

Also, the Hadiths stated that when they would greet 
Muslims, they would say, ‘As-Sadmu ‘alaykum,’ meaning, ‘death 
be to you’. This is why we were commanded to answer them 
by saying, ‘Wa ‘alaykum,’ meaning, ‘and to you too’, then our 
supplication against them shall be answered, rather than 
theirs against us. 

Allah forbade the believers from imitating the disbelievers in 
tongue or deed. Allah said, 


EGG Syed [pre OA SS aes AS Vin et lap 
Se) 
€O you who believe! Say not (to the Messenger 3%) Ra‘ina but 


say Unzurna (make us understand) and hear. And for the 
disbelievers there is a painful torment} (2:104). 


Also, Imam Ahmad narrated that Ibn ‘Umar said that the 
Messenger of Allah 3% said, 
iy dts 0 he V 0555 BI SF I, BU 6k GG Shh 
ert OE 365 as Al BE fo fe Shag BU hss ont Jb Ss 


ose 2 8t 


Nemes 
tl was sent with the sword just before the Last Hour, so that 
Allah is worshipped alone without partners. My sustenance was 
provided for me from under the shadow of my spear. Those who 
oppose my command were humiliated and made inferior, and 


322 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


whoever imitates a people, he is one of them .s!") 
Abu Dawud narrated that the Prophet 2 said, 


‘Whoever imitates a people is one of them.»'?! 


These Hadiths indicate, along with their threats and warnings, 
that we are not allowed to imitate the disbelievers in their 
statements, deeds, clothes, feasts, acts of worship, etc., whatever 
actions of the disbelievers that were not legislated for us. 

Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on the Ayah, 


4105 has I> 
<Say not (to the Messenger #4) Ra‘ina> 


“They used to say to the Prophet , Ar‘ind samak (which is an 
insult).”5! Ibn Abu Hatim said that it was reported that Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah, Abu MAlik, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, ‘Atiyah Al-‘Awfi and 
Qatadah said similarly. '*! Further, Mujahid said, “‘Do not say 
Ra‘ind’ means, ‘Do not dispute’.”>!_ Mujahid said in another 
narration, “Do not say, ‘We hear from you, and you hear from 
us.’” Also, ‘Ata’ said, “Do not say, 


Reh 


€Ra‘ind>, which was a dialect that the Ansar used and which 
was forbidden from use by Allah.”!® 

Also, As-Suddi said, “Rifa‘ah bin Zayd, a Jewish man from 
the tribe of Qaynuqa‘, used to come to the Prophet 2 and say 
to him, ‘Hear, Ghayr Musma’in (let you hear nothing).’ The 
Muslims used to think that the Prophets are greeted and 
honored with this type of speech, and this is why some of them 
used to say, ‘Hear, let you hear nothing,’ and so on, as 
mentioned in Sdrat An-Nisad.” Thereafter, Allah forbade the 
believers from uttering the word Ra‘ina.””) ‘Abdur-Rahman bin 


(1) Ahmad 2:50. 

(2) Abu Dawud 4:314. 
(3) At-Tabari 2:461 

(4) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:317. 
'S) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:318. 
(9) Ibid. 

7] At-Tabari 2 :462. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 323 


Zayd bin Aslam also said similarly.!"! 


The extreme Enmity that the Disbelievers and the 
People of the Book have against Muslims 


Allah said next (2:1085), 
of & pk IK A SCH ¥ 5 SSH ol WIS ol 5 i> 
(ies 


¢Neither those who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture 
(Jews and Christians) nor Al-Mushrikin (the idolaters), like that 
there should be sent down unto you any good from your Lord. 


Allah described the deep enmity that the disbelieving 
polytheists and People of the Scripture, whom Allah warned 
against imitating, have against the believers, so that Muslims 
should sever all friendship with them. Also, Allah mentioned 
what He granted the believers of the peer Law that He 
legislated for their Prophet Muhammad 3%. Allah said, 


obit Quail 3 iy AG % etsy ee a> 
<But Allah chooses for His mercy whom He wills. And Allah is 
the Owner of great bounty> (2:105). 
sda ie diated ada cain G e> 
ao it ail sy’ i p Sead 5 tNG scant ab A dl as ol wh 
<0 nw J; 


<106. Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh (We abrogate) 
or Nunsiha (cause to be forgotten), We bring a better one or 
similar to it. Know you not that Allah is Able to do all 
things?> 

€107. Know you not that it is Allah to Whom belongs the 
dominion of the heavens and the earth? And besides Allih you 
have neither any Wali (protector or guardian) nor any helper.> 


The Meaning of Naskh 
Ibn Abi Talhah said that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


"l tbn Abi Hatim 3 :965. 


324 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


ee ee ist be es 
ee sees 


5 ¢Whatever a __ verse 
° (revelation) do Nansakh> 
- Pie Yip Ndi || means, “Whatever an 
ee See? 3S Ayah We abrogate.”!!! 
xy sWesaloh gf ©. 22545 || Also, Ibn Jurayj said 
Seg ar ve hee that Mujahid said 
oy eas enor tL AS that, ’ 
% yr ter = Ao eer 
MILs D Jctilalie 455 Se RS wD 
\i-- oe ast ° at 
Lae mere tw be SSsa83 I SSH <Whatever a verse 
(2 eee esc (revelation) do Nansakh> 


z at {250 means, “Whatever an 
{SFE Nig AVAL SE Ayah We erase.’"?! 
cy sina (ar cA = fj | Also, Ibn Abi Najih 
: Bo eos ee pc _, | Said that Mujahid said 
ar NaS, ei vey) \G hay £ yo | that, 

GO ESAS 43500 Se RS ud 

Saka EEGINNG 1 4Whatever a verse 
wr) as Abie e ay (revelation) do Nansakh> 
Cet Aas palnd? we means, “We keep the 


69 $i aia cit SSG aint FaAPne) words, but change the 
meaning.” He related 
these words to the 
companions of ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad."! Ibn Abi Hatim said that 
similar statements were mentioned by Abu Al-‘Aliyah and 


Muhammad bin Ka’b Al-Qurazi."*! Also As-Suddi said that, 
<3 Se AOS UD 


qWhatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh> means, “We erase 
it."5| Further, Ibn Abi Hatim said that it means, “Erase and 


() At-Tabari 2:473 

[21 thn Abi Hatim 1:321. 
(31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:322. 
(41 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:322. 
(SI fbn Abi Hatim 1:322. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 325 


raise it, such as erasing the following wordings (from the 
Qur’an), The married adulterer and the married adulteress: 
stone them to death,’ and, Tf the son of Adam had two valleys 
of gold, he would seek a third.’ ""! 

Ibn Jarir stated that, 

i & (oS up 

4Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh> means, “Whatever 
ruling we repeal in an Ayah by making the allowed unlawful 
and the unlawful allowed.” The Nasakh only occurs with 
commandments, prohibitions, permissions, and so forth. As for 
stories, they do not undergo Nasakh. The word, “Nasakh’ 
literally means, ‘to copy a book’. The meaning of Nasakh in the 
case of commandments is removing the commandment and 
replacing it by another. And whether the Nasakh involves the 
wordings, the ruling or both, it is still called Nasakh.!?! 

Allah said next, 


€G8 ld 


¢or Nunsihd (cause it to be forgotten)>. ‘Ali bin Abi Talhah said 
that Ibn ‘Abbas said that, 


468 SN i Ss OS ud 


«Whatever a verse (revelation) do Nansakh or Nunsiha> means, 
“Whatever Ayah We repeal or uphold without change.”5! Also, 
Mujahid said that the companions of Ibn Mas‘ad (who read this 
word Nansa’hd) said that it means, “We uphold its wording and 
change its ruling.”“*! Further, Ubayd bin ‘Umayr, Mujahid and 
‘Ata’ said, ‘Nansa’hd’ means, “We delay it (i.e., do not abrogate 
it). Further, ‘Atiyyah Al-‘Awfi said that the Ayah means, “We 
delay repealing it.”°! This is the same Tafsir provided by As- 
Suddi and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas.!7! 


() Ibn Abi Hatim 1:324. 
2) At-Tabari 1:472. 

{31 At-Tabari 2:476. 

14] at-Tabari 2:473. 

1S! At-Tabari 2:477. 

6] Ibid. 

7) fbn Abi Hatim 1:326. 


326 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


‘Abdur-Razzéq said that Ma‘mar said that Qatadah said 

about Allah’s statement, 

dG Ji & KS 
«Whatever a verse (revelation) do We abrogate or cause to be 
forgotten> “Allah made His Prophet #% forget what He willed and 
He abrogated what He will.” 

Allah’s said, 

dea JE Ze aby 
«We bring a better one or similar to it}, better, relates to the 
benefit provided for the one it addresses, as reported from ‘Ali 
bin Abi Talhah that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 

405 4 ohip 

«We bring a better one> means, “We bring forth a more beneficial 
ruling, that is also easier for you.”'! Also, As-Suddi said that, 

dG, SS 4 ol> 
¢We bring a better one or similar to it) means, “We bring forth a 
better Ayah, or similar to that which was repealed.”7! Qatadah 
also said that, 

deat St se okp 
«We bring a better one or similar to it} means, “We replace it by 


an Ayah more facilitating, permitting, commanding, or 
prohibiting.”>) 


Naskh occurs even though the Jews deny it 
Allah said, 
45 NG ogcatl dB A Si A AS NLS oot F ES Gs ap 
40 pb VG 5 or al oud of ped 
€Know you not that Allah is Able to do all things? Know you 
not that it is Allah to Whom belongs the dominion of the 
heavens and the earth? And besides Allah you have neither any 
(l at-Tabari 2:481. 


[21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:327. 
13] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:327. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 327 


Wali (protector or guardian) nor any helper>. 


Allah directed His servants to the fact that He alone is the 
Owner of His creatures and that He does with them as He 
wills. Indeed, His is the supreme authority and all creation is 
His, and just as He created them as He wills, He brings 
happiness to whom He wills, misery to whom He wills, health 
to whom He wills and ailment to whom He wills. He also 
brings success to whom He wills and failure to whom He wills. 
He judges between His servants as He wills, allows what He 
wills and disallows what He wills. He decides what He wills, 
there is no opponent for His judgment, and no one can 
question Him about what He does, while they shall be 
questioned. He tests His servants and their obedience to His 
Messengers by the Naskh. He commands a matter containing 
a benefit which He knows of, and then He out of His wisdom, 
prohibits it. Hence, perfect obedience is realized by adhering to 
His commands, following His Messengers, believing in what 
ever they convey, implementing their commands and avoiding 
what they prohibit. 

The statements of Allah here contain tremendous benefit, 
prove that the Jews are disbelievers and refute their claim that 
Naskh does not occur, may Allah curse the Jews. In ignorance 
and arrogance they claimed that the sound mind stipulates 
that Naskh does not occur. Some of them falsely claimed that 
there are divine texts that dismiss the possibility that Naskh 
occurred. 

Imam Abu Ja‘far bin Jarir said, “The Ayah means, ‘Do you 
not know, O Muhammad, that I alone own the heavens and 
the earth and that I decide whatever I will in them? I forbid 
whatever I will, change and repeal whatever I will of My 
previous rulings, whenever | will. I also uphold whatever I 
will.” 

Ibn Jarir then said, “Although Allah directed His statement 
indicating His greatness towards His Prophet 3%, He also 
rejected the lies of the Jews who denied that the rulings of the 
Torah could undergo Naskh. The Jews also denied the 
prophethood of Jesus and Muhammad, because of their dislike 
for what they brought from Allah, such as changing some 
rulings of the Torah, as Allah commanded. Allah thus 
proclaimed to the Jews that He owns the heavens and earth 


328 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


and also all authority in them. Further, the subjects in Allah’s 
kingdom are His creation, and they are required to hear and 
obey His commands and prohibitions. Allah has full authority 
to command the creation as He wills, forbidding them from 
what He wills, abrogate what He wills, uphold what He wills, 
and decide whatever commandments and prohibitions He 
wills”!!! 

I (Ibn Kathir) say that the Jews’ dismissal of the occurrence 
of the Naskh is only a case of their disbelief and rebellion. The 
sound mind does not deny that there could be a Naskh in 
Allah’s commandments, for He decides what He wills, just as 
He does what He wills. Further, Naskh occurred in previous 
Books and Law. For instance, Allah allowed Adam to marry 
his daughters to his sons and then later forbade this practice. 
Allah also allowed Nuh to eat from all kinds of animals after 
they left the ark, then prohibited eating some types of foods. 
Further, marrying two sisters to one man was allowed for 
Israel and his children, but Allah prohibited this practice later 
in the Torah. Allah commanded Abraham to slaughter his son, 
then repealed that command before it was implemented. Also, 
Allah commanded the Children of Israel to kill those who 
worshipped the calf and then repealed that command, so that 
the Children of Israel were not all exterminated. There are 
many other instances that the Jews admit have occurred, yet 
they ignore them. Also, it is a well-known fact that their Books 
foretold about Muhammad 3% and contained the command to 
follow him. These texts, in their Books, indicate that the Jews 
were required to follow the Prophet Muhammad # and that no 
good deed would be accepted from them, unless it conformed to 
Muhammad’s Law. The Prophet #% brought another Book, - the 
Qur’an -, which is the last revelation from Allah. 


oy Bel IG oe ee Se oes : Layiay pip 
Cie Saal ape JS as 


€108. Or do you want to ask your ne (iia #5) 
as Miisa (Moses) was asked before (i.e. show us openly our 
Lord)? And he who changes faith for disbelief, verily, he has 


(l At-Tabari 2:488. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 329 
gone astray from the right way.> 


The Prohibition of Unnecessary Questions 


In this Ayah, Allah forbade the believers from asking the 
Prophet # numerous questions about matters that did not 
occur yet. Similarly, Allah said, 

EG ae 2 IS ob BE WS y OH go ks vee a ly 

45 Be 
<O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if made plain 
to you, may cause you trouble. But if you ask about them while 
the Qur'an is being revealed, they will be made plain to you> 
(5:101). 

This Ayah means, “If you ask about a matter after it is 
revealed, it shall be duly explained to you. Therefore, do not 
ask about matters that have not occurred yet, for they might 


become prohibited, due to your questions.” This is why the 
Sahih narrated, 


cates Jel te Bb pS AL a ccd be dhe Ba Sh Sohn bet Op 
‘The greatest criminal among the Muslims is the one who asks 


if a thing is prohibited, which is not prohibited, and it becomes 
prohibited because of his asking about it.» 


This is why when the Messenger of Allah # was asked about 
a husband who finds another man with his wife; if he exposes 
the adultery, he will be exposing a major incident; if he is quiet 
about it, he will be quiet about a major matter. The Messenger 
of Allah 3 did not like such questions. Later on, Allah revealed 
the ruling of Muld‘anah [Refer to Nur 24:6-9 in the Qur’an]. The 
Two Sahihs recorded that Al-Mughirah bin Shu'‘bah said that 
the Messenger of Allah #% “Forbade saying, ‘It was said’ and ‘He 
said,’ and wasting money and asking many questions.”!!! 
Muslim recorded that the Prophet 3% said, 


HE BIA oy KR AG OU fe Oi SE Gg 
EEO gob be SEG Oy tebe ea gE oh sil is cal 
("Fath Al-Bari 3:398, and Muslim 3:1341. 


330 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


‘Leave me as I leave you; those before you were only destroyed 
because of their excessive questioning and disputing with their 
Prophets. Therefore, when I command you with a matter, 
adhere to it as much as you can, and when I forbid from 
something, avoid it.» 


The Prophet # only said this after he told the Companions 
that Allah has ordered them to perform Hajj. A man asked, 
“Every year, O Messenger of Allah?” The Prophet 3 did not 
answer him, but he repeated his question three times. Then the 
Prophet # said, 


cakes us Rey Ar d33) es 25 35 oY 


‘No. Had I said yes, it would have been ordained, and you 
would not have been able to implement it .»!") 


This is why Anas bin Malik said, “We were forbidden from 
asking the Messenger of Allah #% about things. So we were 
delighted when a bedouin man would come and ask him while 
we listened.”!?! 

Muhammad bin Ishaq said that Muhammad bin Abi 
Muhammad told him that Tkrimah or Sa‘td said that Ibn 
‘Abbas said that Rafi‘ bin Huraymilah or Wahb bin Zayd said, 
“O Muhammad! Bring us a Book sent down from heaven and 
which we could read, and make some rivers flow for us, then 
we will follow you and believe in you.” Allah sent down the 
answer to this challenge, 

Of FE IIS 05 TG et StS Kits Vis I yh} sl 

¢€Or do you want to ask your Messenger (Muhammad #%) as 

Musa was asked before (i.e. show us openly our Lord)? And he 

who changes faith for disbelief, verily, he has gone astray from 

the right wayy.'*! 

Allah criticized those who ask the Messenger of Allah 2% 
about a certain matter just for the purpose of being difficult, 
just as the Children of Israel asked Musa out of stubbornness, 


(11 Muslim 2:975. 
12) Muslim 1:41. 
3) At-Tabari 2:490. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 331 
rejection and rebellion. Allah said, 
yeh BEail SKEs 45> 


¢And he who changes faith for disbelief» meaning, whoever prefers 
disbelief to faith, 


<j. sho JS i> 


qverily, he has gone astray from the right way> meaning, he has 
strayed from the straight path, to the path of ignorance and 
misguidance. This is the case of those who deviated from 
accepting the Prophets and obeying them and those who kept 
asking their Prophets unnecessary questions in defiance and 
disbelief, just as Allah said, 


Ae me os pes i WW at co HY Ga At ep 

So as ail aay) iss 
¢Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of 
Allah into disbelief (by denying Prophet Muhammad 3% and his 
Message of Islam), and caused their people to dwell in the house 
of destruction? Hell, in which they will burn and what an evil 
place to settle in!> (14:28-29). 


Abu Al-‘Aliyah commented, “They exchanged comfort for 
paeue mt 
in ee HOS Ki ay fo nae 
ee & asl 45 ok & Lot of * sit Sail 28 eu Fed to gel 
Le Fhe 2 8 ON a ‘es ae S88 ty BS ot Ske 
qs OS c, if & Sl 
4109. Many of the People of the Scripture (Jews and 
Christians) wish that they could turn you away as disbelievers 
after you have believed, out of envy from their own selves, even 
after the truth (that Muhammad 3% is Allah’s Messenger) has 


become manifest unto them. But forgive and overlook, till Allah 
brings His command. Verily, Allah is able to do ail things.> 


€110. And perform the Salah and give the Zakah, and whatever 


"1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :330. 


332 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


of good you send forth for yourselves before you, you shall find 
it with Allah. Certainly, Allah is the Seer of what you do.> 


The Prohibition of following the Ways of the People of 
the Book 


Allah warned His believing servants against following the 
ways of the People of Book, who publicly and secretly harbor 
emnity and hatred for the believers, and who envy the 
believers, while they recognize the virtue of the believers and 
their Prophet 3. Allah also commanded His believing servants 
to forgive them and to be patient with them, until Allah delivers 
His aid and victory to them. Allah commanded the believers to 
perform the prayer perfectly, to pay the Zakdh and He 
encouraged them to preserve the practice of these righteous 
deeds. 

Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that ‘Abdullah bin Ka‘b bin Malik 
said that Ka’‘b bin Al-Ashraf, who was a Jew and a poet, used 
to criticize the Prophet # in his poems, so Allah revealed, 


€ Kas I EST yO 2s Hee 55> 
<Many of the People of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) 


wish that they could turn you away..) regarding his 
matter, |") 


Also, Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “An unlettered 
Messenger came to the People of the Scriptures confirming 
what they have in their own Books about the Messengers and 
the Ayat of Allah. He also believes in all of this, just as they 
believe in it. Yet, they rejected the Prophet out of disbelief, 
envy and transgression. This is why Allah said, 

CSS eS GEG 5 agile se ID 
dout of envy from their own selves, even after the truth (that 
Muhammad #3 is Allah's Messenger) has become manifest unto 
them>. 

Allah said that after He illuminated the truth for them, such 
that they were not ignorant of any of it, yet their envy made 
them deny the Prophet #. Thus Allah criticized, chastised and 


(1 fbn Abi Hatim 1:331. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 333 


denounced them.”'! Allah legislated the characteristics that 
His Prophet #% and the believers should adhere to: belief, faith 
and accepting what Allah revealed to them and to those before 
them out of His generosity and tremendous kindness. 
Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said that, 
¢from their own selves> means, “of their making.”?! Also, Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah said that, 
q Sal 8 SG 2 td 

¢even after the truth (that Muhammad 2% is Allah’s Messenger) 

has become manifest unto them > 
means, “After it became clear that Muhammad 2% is the 
Messenger of Allah whom they find written of in the Torah and 
the Injil. They denied him in disbelief and transgression 
because he was not one of them.”*! Qatadah and Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas said similarly.'* Allah said, 

€ingh, at ah & Aaa EOD 

<But forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command.> this is 
similar to His saying; 

Cia IN TSN et G5 eet on CEST BN Sol Se GD 

¢And you shall certainly hear much that will grieve you from 

those who received the Scripture before you (Jews and 

Christians) and from those who ascribe partners to Allah> 

(3:186). 

‘Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn ‘Abbas said that Allah’s 
statement, 
dil at ob WALLS sp 


<But forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command.> was 
abrogated by the Ayah, 


(1 At-Tabari 2:502. 

21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :332. 
3] bn Abi Hatim 1:335. 
41 Ibid. 


334 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
49555 LS GSB Sty 
€Then kill the Mushrikin wherever you find them} (9:5), and, 


425i oh YG Bh OS Y all (45> 


¢Fight against those who believe not in Allah, nor in the Last Day» 
(9:29) until, 


dyn yp 
¢And feel themselves subdued> (9:29). 


Allah’s pardon for the disbelievers was repealed.”! Abu Al- 
‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Qatadah and As-Suddil!?! said 
similarly: It was abrogated by the Ayah of the sword." 
(Mentioned above). The Ayah, 


Cinch, al ak FD 


€till Allah brings His command.> gives further support for this 
view. 

Ibn Abi Hatim recorded Usaémah bin Zayd saying that the 
Messenger of Allah # and his Companions used to forgive the 
disbelievers and the People of the Book, just as Allah 
commanded in His statement, 


455 sh Jo & HY SAA Ah & ipaols Wisp 


€But forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command. 
Verily, Allah is able to do all things>. 


The Messenger of Allah #2 used to forgive them and was 
patient with them as Allah ordered him, until Allah allowed 
fighting them. Then Allah destroyed those who He decreed to be 
killed among the strong men of Quraysh, by the Prophet’s 
forces.'3! The chain of narration for this text is Sahih, but I did 
not see its wordings in the six collections of Hadith, although 
the basis of it is in the Two Sahihs, narrated from Usamah bin 
Zayd.!41 
"I Ibn Abi Hatim 1:334. 

2! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:335. 
31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :333. 
(41 Fath Al-Bari 8:87, and Muslim 3 :1422. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 335 


The Encouragement to perform Good Deeds 
Allah said, 
Cl Lee AZ ZS os KAN Ud ws BSH rey Geant Lsly> 
€And perform the Salah and give the Zakah, and whatever of 


good you send forth for yourselves before you, you shall find it 
with Allah». 


Allah encouraged the believers to busy themselves in 
performing deeds that would bring them benefit and reward on 
the Day of Resurrection, such as prayer and paying Zakdh. 
This way, they will gain Allah’s aid in this life and on a Day 
when the witnesses testify, 

Co NN 5 pals LAM 455 peat Saal Ga SD 

<The Day when their excuses will be of no profit to the Zalimin 
(wrongdoers). Theirs will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil 
abode (i.e. painful torment in Hell-fire)> (40:52). 

This is why Allah said, 

tt ONS Gat Hp 

<Certainly, Allah sees what you do», meaning, that He is never 
unaware of the deeds of any person, nor will these deeds be 
lost by Him. Whether deeds are righteous or evil, Allah will 


award each according to what he or she deserves based on 
their deeds. 


° oe ES -t e, Gave Y “2% 7 ot, Sorte Aber 4 the, 
A bb ABC ths US Ne OF os Vy BA EY FS esp 
ig HAS 8 Sh aS IEG iis ke y chess 
Woe 0h < vow tye “eg ee 40 oe krer 6 ae a fo hoe 4, ow 
AUS a Fer co AG Shs aA AS aye SEG 
Bee ee peter ew Se ee on tee CL + dee ” a ee ote ree yes, 
ree Je Sle Y Gal JG IS Cast ode 285 ck Bi oo Wiel 
Cio Soak 4a WE tea all OG eS KEE 
€111. And they say, ‘‘None shall enter Paradise unless he be a 
Jew or a Christian.” These are their own desires. Say (O 
Muhammad 38), “Produce your Burhin if you are truthful .'> 


€112. Yes! But whoever submits his face (himself) to Allah (i.e. 
follows Allah's religion of Islamic Monotheism) and he is a 
Muhsin then his reward is with his Lord (Allah), on such shall 


336 Tafsir_Ibn_ Kathir 


\A EB be no fear, nor 


“fe 


Becca Ais tiie; shall they grieve.> 


“ Rieghe ce Bed 4113. The Jews said that 
as hadi the Christians follow 


icles ae oye ee Co ad oe ‘ . 
562 38 SSL Saif nothing (i.e. are not on 
re $8 sats Ac the right religion); and 
Jugalieas'ybl03 Wl tne Christians said that 
Bee ad ets ae siesatits te a Jolt the Jews follow nothing 


ies SeeRe sore pete (i.e. are not on the right 
C exnracen EV GL 4 crews religion); though they 

ni4 Hae both recite the Scripture. 
Sal oN Gob oie seeds Like unto their fetes 
said those (the pagans) 
who know not. Allah 
will judge between them 
on the Day of Resurrec- 
tion about that wherein 
they have been 
“ai ener exe differing. 


EGE iS Pip tboncon 

MU f , Dips h Wey tas 
a ae ‘ 4 

USA gh baitsigall 


Seseor cee8 As oe A; 


Ore Gia sisal fee 
S. spiced los rar. EV Ge 


ee 


The Hopes of the 
People of the Book 


Allah made the 
confusion of the Jews 
and the Christians 
clear, since they claim that no one will enter Paradise, unless 
he is a Jew or a Christian. Similarly, Allah mentioned their 
claims in Surat Al-Ma@’idah: 


dials at Bah Sep 
We are the children of Allah and His loved ones> (5:18). 


Allah refuted this false claim and informed them that they 
will be punished because of their sins. Previously we 
mentioned their claim that the Fire would not touch them for 
more than a few days, after which they would be put in 
Paradise. Allah rebuked this claim, and He said about this 
baseless claim, 


4 


qpAtcd isy 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 337 


<These are their own desires>. Abu Al-‘Aliyah commented, “These 
are wishes that they wished Allah would answer, without 
basis.”"! Similar was stated by Qatadah and Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas.!?! Allah then said, 


<i5> 
<Say> meaning, “Say O Muhammad:” 
EjatSs Rap 


<“Produce your Burhan...’"> meaning, “Your proof’, as Abu Al- 
‘Aliyah, Mujahid, As-Suddi and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas stated.!*! 
Qatadah said that the Ayah means, “Bring the evidence that 
supports your statement, 


dine 2S sip 


4if you are truthful» in your claim.”"*1 
Allah then said, 
2 HS he Ge 
<Yes! But whoever submits his face (himself) to Allah (i.e. follows 
Allah's religion of Islamic Monotheism) and he is a Muhsin} 


meaning, “Whoever performs deeds in sincerity, for Allah alone 
without partners.” In a similar statement, Allah said, 
CE 5 & Gets CE Js ae agp 
4So if they dispute with you (Muhammad #3) say: “I have 
submitted myself to Allah (in Islam), and (so have) those who 
follow me.’’> (3:20) 


Abu Al-‘Aliyah and Ar-Rabi‘ said that, 
44 hes al & > 


€Yes! But whoever submits his ee (himself) to Allah> means, 
“Whoever is sincere with Allah.”! 


() Ibn Abi Hatim 1:336. 
2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :336. 
(3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :337. 
(41 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :337. 
(Sl ton Abi Hatim 1:337. 


338 Tafsir _Ibn Kathir 


Also, Said bin Jubayr said that, 
tai 5 


<Yes! But whoever submits» means, he is sincere, 


ares 


Me 
¢his face (himself)> meaning, in his religion.!"! 
452 Shp 
qand he is a Muhsin} following the Messenger 3%. For there are 
two conditions for deeds to be accepted; the deed must be 
performed for Allah’s sake alone and conform to the Shari‘ah. 


When the deed is sincere, but does not conform to the Shari‘ah, 

then it will not be accepted. The Messenger of Allah 3% said, 
‘Whoever performs a deed that does not conform with our 
matter (religion), then it will be rejected .» 

This Hadith was recorded by Muslim.'?! Therefore, the good 
deeds of the priests and rabbis will not be accepted, even if 
they are sincerely for Allah alone, because these deeds do not 
conform with the method of the Messenger 3%, who was sent 
for all mankind. Allah said regarding such cases, 


vores 


<And We shall turn to whatever deeds they (disbelievers, 
polytheists, sinners) did, and We shall make such deeds as 
scattered floating particles of dust.) (25:23) 


eee fae “Se Oe bee tye oer oe, ar ae Aidt ae 2 ee 
4G tig BE Wy HU Sea ce a IT Il ie 4:15 


As for those who disbelieved, their deeds are like a mirage in a 
desert. The thirsty one thinks it to be water, until he comes up 
to tt, he finds it to be nothing .> (24:39) and, 


SE te ee eB cde or cee Be BB, Le 7! DOS 
Sele . . sen ft ae 4 = ete ae 4 a7 yt ee 
qos hel ge & GS UEC Oe GS eb he ee Jeeh ory 


<Some faces, that Day will be humiliated. Laboring, weary. 


11] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:338. 
[2] Muslim 3:1344. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 339 


They will enter in the hot blazing Fire. They will be given to 
drink from a boiling spring} (88:2-5). 

When the deed conforms to the Shari‘ah outwardly, but the 
person did not perform it sincerely for Allah alone, the deed 
will also be rejected, as in the case of the hypocrites and those 
who do their deeds to show off. Similarly, Allah said, 


KPO G9 


by ae its pal jy Par 15 pernes ns) ait Spake Enaatcil a> 

4G Vy St SKE 5 I 
<Verily, the hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but it is He Who 
deceives then. And when they stand up for As-Salah (the 


prayer), they stand with laziness to be seen by people, and they 
do not remember Allah but little.> (4:142) and, 


ra 
eo heoere “ ss More 


Spits uM gh ST SSAC pps ve Gat ight I O8> 

€.y Voc 
€So woe unto those performers of Salah (prayers) (hypocrites). 
Those who delay their Salah (from their stated fixed times). 


Those who do good deeds only to be seen (of men). And 
withhold Al-Ma‘tin (small kindnesses)> (107:4-7). 


This is why Allah said, 
405 ug) sity IBY Oe Se J gd ols te > 
<So whoever hopes for the meeting with his Lord, let him work 


righteousness and associate none as a partner in the worship of 
his Lord} (18:110). 


He also said in this Ayah, 
2 ahs Lg 
€Yes, but whoever submits his face (himself) to Allah (follows 
Allah's religion of Islamic Monotheism) and he is a Muhsin>. 
Allah’s statement, 
4A BM pyle SE VG 295 ke hel iD 

¢Shall have their reward with their Lord, on them shall be no 
fear, nor shall they grieve} 


guaranteed them the rewards and safety from what they fear 
and should avoid. 


340 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


o hee ve 


dpe OS Sid 
<There shall be no fear on them> in the future, 
C54 A Vip 


nor shall they grieve> about what they abandoned in the past. 
Moreover, Sa‘id bin Jubayr said, 


pyle SS Sap 
“4There shall be no fear on them> in the Hereafter, and 
asd jh Vp 


nor shall they grieve» about their imminent death.”!!! 


The Jews and Christians dispute among Themselves out 
of Disbelief and Stubbornness 


Allah said, 
SHE BS gh Se LA A HI SHUG A od Set SD 


<The Jews said that the Christians follow nothing (i.e. are not 
on the right religion); and the Christians said that the Jews 
follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); though they 
both recite the Scripture .> 


Allah explained the disputes, hatred and stubbornness that 
the People of the Book have towards each other. Muhammad 
bin Ishdq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “When a delegation of 
Christians from Najran came to the Messenger of Allah #7, the 
Jewish rabbis came and began arguing with them before the 
Messenger of Allah 2%. Rafi‘ bin Huraymilah said, ‘You do not 
follow anything,’ and he reiterated his disbelief in Jesus and 
the Injil. Then a Christian man from Najran’s delegation said to 
the Jews, ‘Rather, you do not follow anything,’ and he 
reiterated his rejection of Masa’s prophethood and his disbelief 
in the Torah. So Allah revealed the Ayah, 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :338. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 341 


€ESSH Sis 235 5c ESA LD CN GIES 58K SSN oT iS IG; 
<The Jews said that the Christians follow nothing (i.e. are not 
on the right religion); and the Christians said that the Jews 
follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); though they 
both recite the Scripture .>”""! 


Allah made it clear that each party read the affirmation of 
what they claimed to reject in their Book. Consequently, the 
Jews disbelieve in Jesus, even though they have the Torah in 
which Allah took their Covenant by the tongue of Moses to 
believe in Jesus. Also, the Gospel contains Jesus’ assertion 
that Moses’ prophethood and the Torah came from Allah. Yet, 
each party disbelieved in what the other party had. 

Allah said, 


Cig 5 Se 52 F St 56 AS 
¢Like unto their word, said those who know not> 


thus exposing the ignorance displayed by the Jews and the 
Christians concerning their statements that we mentioned. 
There is a difference of opinion regarding the meaning of 
Allah’s statement, 


45,55 ¥ St> 
«who know not> 
For instance, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and Qatadah said that, 
45-55 ¥ Galt Jb ASD 
<Like unto their word, said those said those who know not> 


means, “The Christians said similar statements to the 
Jews.”7! Ibn Jurayj asked ‘Ata’ “Who are those ‘who know 
not’?” ‘Ata’ said, “Nations that existed before the Jews and the 
Christians and before the Torah and the Gospel.”"*! Also, As- 
Suddi said that, 


4556 ¥ Sit 56> 
1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:339. 


[21 ton Abi Hatim 1:341. 
3) thn Abi Hatim 1:340. 


342 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€said those who know not> 


is in reference to the Arabs who said that Muhammad 3 was 
not following anything (i.e. did not follow a true or existing 
religion).!") Abu Ja‘far bin Jarir chose the view that this Ayah 
is general and that there is no evidence that specifically 
supports any of these explanations. So interpreting the Ayah in 
a general way is better. Allah knows best. 
Allah said, 

€Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection 

about that wherein they have been differing .> 
meaning, that Allah will gather them all on the Day of Return. 
On that Day, Allah will justly judge between them, for He is 
never unjust with anyone, even as little as the weight of an 
atom. This Ayah is similar to Allah’s statement in Surat Al-Hajj 
(22:17), 

il Oy eal inl Aah BiG aaah We al an SBT > 

COL! AF Ey Oe oS Le 

<Verily, those who believe (in Allah and in His Messenger 

Muhammad 383), and those who are Jews, and the Sabians, and 

the Christians, and the Majtis, and those who associate partners 

with Allah; truly, Allah will judge between them on the Day of 

Resurrection. Verily, Allah is over all things a Witness>. 


Allah said, 

<Say: “Our Lord will assemble us all together (on the Day of 

Resurrection), then He will judge between us with truth. And 

He is the Just Judge, the Knower of the true state of affairs.’"> 

(34:26). 

pO OE GB Web os ROT a SE Sh ae ok AT o> 
dicks Side 19 a 4b Gis Gal g 2) uk Vy GS 

4114. And who are more unjust than those who forbid that 


"I thn Abi Hatim 1:340. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 343 


Allah’s Name be mentioned (i.e. prayers and invocations) in 
Allah’s Masjids and strive for their ruin? It was not fitting that 
such should themselves enter them (Allah's Masjids) except in 
fear. For them there is disgrace in this world, and they will 
have a great torment in the Hereafter .> 


Of the Most Unjust are Those Who prevent People from 
the Masjids and strive for their Ruin 


The Quraysh idolators are those who hindered the people 
from the Masjids of Allah and wanted to destroy them. Ibn 
Jarir reported that Ibn Zayd said that Allah’s statement, 


dns 6 65 RNG ISRO I gp 


¢And who are more unjust than those who forbid that Allah's 
Name be mentioned (i.e. prayers and invocations) in Allah’s 
Masjids and strive for their ruin?> 


is about the Quraysh idolators who prevented the Prophet #% 
from entering Makkah from Al-Hudaybiyyah, until he 
slaughtered the Hadi (animal for sacrifice) at Dhi-Tuwa. He 
then agreed to a peace treaty with the idolators and said to 
them, ‘No one before has ever prevented people from entering the 
House. One would even see the killer of his father and brother, but 
would not prevent him (from entering the House of Allah).» They 
said, “Whoever killed our fathers at Badr, shall never enter it 
while there is one of us alive.” Allah’s statement, 


CIF 3 GoSd 
€and strive for their ruin> 


means those who prevent whoever maintain the Masjids with 
Allah’s remembrance and who visit Allah’s House to perform 
Hajj and ‘Umrah."') Ibn Abi Hatim recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas 
said that the Quraysh prevented the Prophet #¢ from praying 
at the Ka‘bah in Al-Masjid Al-Haram, so Allah revealed, 


ALK Ua SE SN il Sues EF ok, GAB gad 


¢And who are more unjust than those who forbid that Allah's 
Name be mentioned (i.e. prayers and invocations) in Allah's 


0) at-Tabari 2:521. 


344 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Masjids?>""") 

After Allah chastised the Jews and Christians, He also 
criticized the idolators who expelled the Messenger of Allah 3 
and his Companions from Makkah, preventing them from 
praying in Al-Masjid Al-Hardm, which they kept exclusively for 
their idols and polytheism. Allah said, 


iy aS Tee 65 SH atch 2 Sykes gts a ed VT a > 

dela ¥ parcol 5655 SAE Wy Gs 
¢And why should not Allah punish them while they hinder 
(men) from Al-Masjid Al-Hardm, and they are not its 


guardians? None can be its guardians except Al-Muttaqin (the 
pious), but most of them know not.} (8:34) 


ELS ASN KG pq ctl F Goad His YAS DEGLI OF uD 
2d BL SS al ge PS) GAS OT yy cal 
in BSS ASG oS WY SE SG HEM Su; lat eh ST 

aca e ell 
<It is not for the Mushrikin (polytheists), to maintain the 
Masjids of Allah while they witness against their own selves of 
disbelief. The works of such are in vain and in Fire shall they 
abide. The Masjids of Allah shall be maintained only by those 
who believe in Allah and the Last Day; perform the Salah, and 
give the Zakah and fear none but Allah. It is they who are on 
true guidance .> (9:17-18) 


and, 


eae Sto cher Cd bd rat orto wl ere ae 4 
Sey IF, we a ol BSS. GMb ell acti 2 pois YS all > 
+1 a Click tae PO ee A OY OY a es be ge ee 
“if Sead ple he he 4G SE A I ay SS ty OH 


“ 


é: Ae ose 2 gre Ke veges oan ot Ge ae vee, 
<font ds 24h 1 SN OT GS FS aS 


They are the ones who disbelieved and hindered you from Al- 
Masjid-Al-Haram (at Makkah) and detained the sacrificial 


(1 fbn Abi Hatim 1:341. 


Surault 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 345 


animals, from reaching their place of sacrifice. Had there not 
been believing men and believing women whom you did not 
know, that you may kill them and on whose account a sin 
would have been committed by you without (your) knowledge, 
that Allah might bring into His mercy whom He wills — if 
they (the believers and the disbelievers) had been apart, We 
verily, would have punished those of them who disbelieved with 
painful torment> (48:25). 


Therefore, Allah said here, 


40 24 se gna 


I GEN Gry tht 6h 9 LG al on St a SD 


4 Gree 
dai Y) Ae 


<The Masjids of Allah shall be maintained only by those who 
believe in Allah and the Last Day; perform the Salah, and give 
the Zakah and fear none but Allah>. 


Therefore, if those believers who follow the virtues mentioned 
in the Ayah were prevented from attending the Masjid, then 
what cause for destruction is worse than this? Maintaining the 
Masjids not only means beautifying them, but it involves 
remembering Allah, establishing His Shari‘ah in the Masjids 
and purifying them from the filth of Shirk. 


The Good News that Islam shall prevail 
Allah said next, 


Krai Vy GRE J oS Of u Aglp 


<it was not fitting that such should themselves enter them 
(Allah’s Masjids) except in fear>. 


This Ayah means, “Do not allow them - the disbelievers - to 
enter the Masjids, except to satisfy the terms of an armistice or 
a treaty.” When the Messenger of Allah # conquered Makkah 
in 9 H, he commanded that someone announce at Mina, “After 
the current year, no idolators shall perform Hajj, and no naked 
persons shall perform Tawdf around the House, except for those 
who have a treaty. In this case, the treaty will be carried to the 
end of its term.”'! This Ayah supports the Ayah, 


(1 Fath AL-Bari 3:565. 


346 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


GS faye 15 SN Sc pt i Se SS Cy Bn ah Asp 


€O you who believe! (in Allah’s Oneness and in His Messenger 
Muhammad 23)! Verily, the Mushrikiin (idolators) are Najasun 
(impure). So let them not come near Al-Masjid-Al-Haram (at 
Makkah) after this year) (9:28). 

It was also said that this Ayah (2:114) carries the good news 
for the Muslims from Allah that He will allow them to take 
over Al-Masjid Al-Hardm and all the Masjids and disgrace the 
idolators. Soon after, the Ayah indicated, no idolator shall 
enter the House, except out of fear of being seized or killed, 
unless he embraces Islam. Allah fulfilled this promise and 
later decreed that idolators not be allowed to enter Al-Masyjid 
Al-Haradm. The Messenger of Allah 2% stated that no two 
religions should remain in the Arabian Peninsula, and the Jews 
and Christians should be expelled from it, all praise is due to 
Allah. All of these rulings ensure maintaining the honor of Al- 
Masjid Al-Hardm and purifying the area where Allah sent His 
Messenger # to warn and bring good news to all of mankind, 
may Allah’s peace and blessings be on him. 

This Ayah also described the disgrace that the disbelievers 
earn in this life, and that the punishment comes in a form 
comparable to the deed. Just as they prevented the believers 
from entering Al-Masjid Al-Haradm, they were prevented from 
entering it in turn. Just as they expelled the believers from 
Makkah, they were in turn expelled from Makkah, 


dre Le 15 g sd 

qand they will have a great torment in the Hereafter} 
because they breached the sanctity of the House and brought 
filth to it by erecting idols all around it, invoking other than 
Allah and performing Tawdf around it while naked, etc. 

Here it is worth mentioning the Hadith about seeking refuge 
from disgrace in this life and the torment of the Hereafter. 
Imam Ahmad recorded that Busr bin Artah said that the 
Messenger of Allah 2 used to supplicate, 


aT wilizs ia SF ot trels ys 2M Gale ea gue 


tO Allah! Make our end better in all affairs, and save us from 
disgrace in this life and the torment of the Hereafter.» 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 347 
This Hadith is Hasan." 
Lae Los My tes 5S eh eG St Asp 


€115. And to Allah belong the east and the west, so wherever 
you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah 
(and He is High above, over His Throne). Surely, Allah is 
Sufficient (for His creatures’ needs), Knowing .> 


Facing the Qiblah (Direction of the Prayer) 


This ruling brought comfort to the Messenger of Allah 3 and 
his Companions, who were driven out of Makkah and had to 
depart from the area of Al-Masjid Al-Haram. In Makkah, the 
Messenger of Allah 3% used to pray in the direction of Bayt Al- 
Maadis, while the Ka‘bah was between him and the Qiblah. 
When the Messenger 3 migrated to Al-Madinah, he faced Bayt 
Al-Maqdis for sixteen or seventeen months, and then Allah 
directed him to face Al-Ka‘bah in prayer. This is why Allah said, 

¢And to Allah belong the east and the west, so wherever you 
turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the Face of Allah (and 
He is High above, over His Throne)>. 


‘Ali bin Abi Talhah said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The first part 
of the Qur’an that was abrogated was about the Qiblah. When 
the Messenger of Allah #% migrated to Al-Madinah, which was 
inhabited by the Jews, he was at first commanded to face Bayt 
Al-Maqdis. The Jews were happy, and the Messenger of Allah x 
faced Bayt Al-Maqdis for some ten months. However, the 
Messenger of Allah % liked to face the Qiblah of Ibrahim (Al- 
Ka‘bah at Makkah), and he used to look to the sky and 
supplicate. So Allah revealed, 


qa 3 digs AS 05 BD 


<Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face 
towards the heaven> until, 


Seve tee as ther 
€HNE Kady I> 


"1 Anmad 4:181. 


348 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
¢turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction} (2:144). 
The Jews were disturbed by this development and said, 


‘What made them change the direction of the Qiblah that they 
used to face?’ Allah revealed, 


<Say (O Muhammad 3): ‘To Allah belong both, east and the 
west’’> and, 


4 5 (5 IG Cee 


€So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the 
Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne)>.”""! 


Tkrimah said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
iii 55 (SUIS aD 
So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the 
Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne)> 


means, “Allah’s direction is wherever you face, east or west.”7! 
Mujahid said that, 


ail 25 AS ep 


€So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the 
Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne)> 


means, “Wherever you may be, you have a Qibliah to face, 
that is, Al-Ka‘bah.”"*! 


However, it was said that Allah sent down this Ayah before 
the order to face the Ka‘bah. Ibn Jarir said, “Others said that 
this Ayah was revealed to the Messenger of Allah 2% permitting 
the one praying voluntary prayers to face wherever they wish in 
the east or west, while traveling, when in fear and when facing 
the enemy.”*! For instance, Ibn ‘Umar used to face whatever 
direction his animal was headed and proclaim that the 
Messenger of Allah #% did the same, explaining the Ayah, 


OY At-Tabari 2:527. 
2] tpn Abi Hatim 1:347. 
(3) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:345. 
4] At-Tabari 2:530. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 349 
4G 155 SG 


€So wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the 
Face of Allah>.""! 


That Hadith was also collected by Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, An- 
Nasai, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Marduwyah, and its origin is in the 
Two Sahihs from Ibn Umar and ‘Amr bin Rabi‘ah without 
mentioning the Ayah.”! In his Sahih, Al-Bukhari recorded 
that Nafi‘ said that whenever Ibn ‘Umar was asked about the 
prayer during times of fear, he used to describe it and would 
then say, “When the sense of fear is worse than that, pray 
while standing, or while riding, whether facing the Qiblah or 
not.” Nafi‘ then said, “I think Ibn ‘Umar mentioned that from 
the Prophet 3#%.”5! It was also said that the Ayah was revealed 
about those who are unable to find the correct direction of the 
Qibiah in the dark or due to cloudy skies and, thus, prayed in a 
direction other than the Qiblah by mistake. 


The Qiblah for the People of Al-Madinah is what is 
between the East and the West 


In his Tafsir of this Ayah (2:115), Al-Hafiz Ibn Marduwyah 
recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the Messenger of Allah said, 
tial als eT Ya Bach BY Os Ody gba 35 we 
‘What is between the east and the west is the Qiblah for the 
people of Al-Madinah, Ash-Sham and ‘Iraq .»'*\ 
At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah recorded this Hadith with the 
wording, 
15 Shai GLU 3g ue 
«What is between the east and the west is a Qiblah.0!5 
Ibn Jarir said, “The meaning of Allah’s statement; 


01 At-Tabari 2:530. 

21 Muslim 1:486, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8:292, An-Nasaii in Al-Kubraé 
1 :244, Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :344, and Al-Hakim 2 :266. 

(31 Fath Al-Bari 8:46. 

(4] Al-Ugayli 4 :309. 

8] Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 2:317, and Ibn Majah 1:323. 


350 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
qh 65 il > 


<Surely, Allah is Sufficient (for His creatures’ needs), 
Knowing> 


is that Allah encompasses all His Creation by providing them 
with sufficient needs and by His generosity and favor. His 
statement, 


ered 
<Knowing> 
means He is knowledgeable of their deeds and nothing escapes 
His watch, nor is He unaware of anything. Rather, His 
knowledge encompasses everything.”! 


oo 
anaes nA eae 04% 


bs GSAS AK GONG oscal gu dy ae Oh af ET Lisp 
45S F A De Ob ois ts GG sca 
4116. And they (Jews, Christians and pagans) say: Allah has 
begotten a son (children or offspring). Glory is to Him (Exalted 
is He above all that they associate with Him). Nay, to Him 
belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and all are 
Qanitiin to Him.> 
4117. The Originator of the heavens and the earth. When He 
decrees a matter, He only says to it: ““Be!’”’ — and it is.> 


Refuting the Claim that Allah has begotten a Son 


This and the following Aydt refute the Christians, may Allah 
curse them, and their like among the Jews and the Arab 
idolators, who claimed that the angels are Allah’s daughters. 
Allah refuted all of them in their claim that He had begotten a 
son. Allah said, 


E522) 
Glory is to Him.> 
meaning, He is holier and more perfect than such claim; 


4GNG oss gu A SD 


(4 At-Tabari 2 :537. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 351 


Nay, to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth,> 


meaning, the truth is not as the disbelievers claimed, rather, 
Allah’s is the kingdom of the heavens and earth and whatever 
and whoever is in, on and between them. Allah is the Supreme 
Authority in the heavens and earth, and He is the Creator, 
Provider and Sustainer Who decides all the affairs of the 
creation as He wills. All creatures are Allah’s servants and are 
owned by Him. Therefore, how could one of them be His son? 
The son of any being is born out of two comparable beings. 
Allah has no equal or rival sharing His grace and greatness, so 
how can He have a son when He has no wife? Allah said, 


«. he Wie tbe sree B, 4 te BET I Phe Se Me Oe oe, biapee 4 
Kt FAS GD WIS I GNG egcaii gay 
qlee Ft 


¢He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. How can 
He have children when He has no wife? He created all things 
and He is the Knower of everything> (6:101). 


i EE Lect Nes a et A A a SN AT asp 
Sek Sey gh NG ate Ges A es Su Bs ENT 88 
piles Peal ad wee eT ot ANG ogc a x Jee a oth 

4.50055 2S oat RG 
€And they say: “The Most Gracious (Allah) has begotten a son 
(offspring or children).”” Indeed you have brought forth (said) a 
terrible evil thing. Whereby the heavens are almost torn, and 
the earth is split asunder, and the mountains fall in ruins. That 
they ascribe a son (or offspring or children) to the Most 
Gracious (Allah). But it is not suitable for (the majesty of) the 
Most Gracious (Allah) that He should beget a son (or offspring 
or children). There is none in the heavens and the earth but 
comes unto the Most Gracious (Allah) as a servant. Verily, He 
knows each one of them, and has counted them a full counting. 
And everyone of them will come to Him alone on the Day of 
Resurrection (without any helper, or protector or defender)> 
(19:88-95), and, 


352 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


4 ae bj (22 
€Say: “He is Allah (the) One, Allah the Samad (the Self- 
Sufficent, upon whom all depend), He begets not, nor was He 
begotten, and there is none comparable to Him.”’> (112). 

In these Aydt, Allah stated that He is the Supreme Master 
Whom there is no equal or rival, everything and everyone was 
created by Him, so how can He have a son from among them? 
This is why, in the Tafsir of this Ayah, Al-Bukhari recorded 
that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Prophet # said, 


GE tus D355 ay ects us FS ods eit 3 ols: Jud an Ju 
IDs J IS ty Lb Uh, Sw us cael OEY OT es ot ak 

wily gf Kets Sf Sf gus 
«Allah said, ‘The son of Adam has denied Me, and that is not 
his right. He has. insulted Me, and that is not his right. As for 
the denial of Me, he claimed that | am unable to bring him back 
as he used to be (resurrect him). As for his insulting Me, he 


claimed that I have a son. All praise is due to Me, it is 
unbefitting that I should have a wife or a son.’> 


This Hadith was recorded by Al-Bukhari.!! 
It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that the Messenger of Allah 
3% said, 
wei ho Wy I Sess By cat ye Gee GST Le Gol dct 
tigers 

«No one is more patient when hearing an insult than Allah. 
They attribute a son to Him, yet He still gives them sustanence 
and health .»|?) 


Everything is within Allah’s Grasp 
Allah said, 
45355 J K> 
qall are Qanitiin to Him). 


(I Fath ALBari 8:18. 
[21 Fath ALBari 13 :372, and Muslim 4:2160. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (Part-1) 353 


Ibn Abi Hatim said that Abu Sa‘id Al-Ashaj informed them 
that Asbat informed them from Mutarrif, from ‘Atiyah, from 
Ibn ‘Abbas who said that, 


45555) 
€Qantin> (2:238) 


means, they pray to Him.") dkrimah and Abu Malik also said 
that, 


45555 § ¥> 
gand all are Qanittin to Him.> 
means, bound to Him in servitude to Him.'7] Said bin Jubayr 
said that Qanitun is sincerity.'°! Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said that, 
45335 A KD 
dall are Qanitiin to Him.> 


means, “Standing up - before Him - on the Day of 
Resurrection.”*! Also, As-Suddi said that, 


45555 A ¥> 
¢and all are Qanittin to Him.> 


means, “Obedient on the Day of Resurrection.”5! Khasif said 
that Mujahid said that, 


555 J ¥> 


¢and all are Qanitiin to Him.> means, “Obedient. He says, ‘Be a 
human’ and he becomes a human.”®! He also said, “(Allah 
says,) ‘Be a donkey’ and it becomes a donkey.” Also, Ibn Abi 
Najih said that Mujahid said that, 


453555 A ¥> 
¢and all are Qanitiin to Him.> 


() Tbn Abi Hatim 1:349. 
(2) Ibid. 

(31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:350. 
141 hid. 

IS) At-Tabari 2:538. 

IS] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:349. 


354 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


means, obedient. Mujahid also said, “The obedience of the 
disbeliever occurs when his shadow prostrates, while he hates 
that. ”!!] Mujahid’s statement, which Ibn Jarir preferred, 
combines all the meanings, and that is that Quniit means 
obedience and submission to Allah. There are two categories of 
Qunut: legislated and destined, for Allah said, 


CQ HICH 5 AS OG EL AAG gat go 5 > 
¢And unto Allah (alone) falls in prostration whoever is in the 


heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and so do their 
shadows in the mornings and in the (late) afternoons} (13:15). 


The Meaning of Badi‘ 
Allah said, 
CNG S54 BS 
<The Badi’ (Originator) of the heavens and the earth.> 


which means, He created them when nothing resembling them 
existed. Mujahid and As-Suddi said that this is the linguistic 
meaning, for all new matters are called Bid‘ah. Muslim 
recorded the Messenger of Allah #% saying, 


«.. every innovation (in religion) is a Bid‘ah» 
There are two types of Bid‘ah, religious, as mentioned in the 
Hadith: 
«.,.every innovation is a Bid‘ah and every Bid‘ah is heresy .s!?| 


And there is a linguistic Bid‘ah, such as the statement of the 
Leader of the faithful ‘Umar bin Al-Khattaéb when he gathered 
the Muslims to pray the Tardwih prayer in congregation 
(which was also an earlier practice of the Prophet #) and said, 
“What a good Bid‘ah this is.” 

Ibn Jarir said, “Thus the meaning of the Aydt (2:116-117) 
becomes, ‘Allah is far more glorious than to have had a son, 


(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:348. 
2) Muslim 2:592. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 355 


for He is the Owner of everything that is in the heavens and 
earth. All testify to His Oneness and to their submissiveness to 
Him. He is their Creator and Maker. Without created 
precedence, He shaped the creatures in their current shapes. 
Allah also bears witness to His servants that Jesus, who some 
claimed to be Allah’s son, is among those who testify to His 
Oneness. Allah stated that He created the heavens and earth 
out of nothing and without precedent. Likewise, He created 
Jesus, the Messiah, with His power and without a father.”!"! 
This explanation from Ibn Jarir, may Allah have mercy upon 
him, is very good and correct. 
Allah said, 


45S 5 5S gs OD 
When He decrees a matter, He only says to it : ““Be!’’ — and 
it is.> 
thus, demonstrating His perfectly complete ability and 
tremendous authority; if He decides a matter, He merely 


orders it to, ‘Be’ and it comes into existence. Similarly, Allah 
said, 


Ci BSS SF BS ACE wh A yp 


<Verily, His command, when He intends a thing, is only that 
He says to it, ““Be!’’ — and it is.> (36:82), 


CG FAG ING 3 GH GD 


<Verily, Our Word unto a thing when We intend it, is only 
that We say unto it: “Be!” — and it is.> (16:40) and, 


45 oh oF 15 4 EA GD 


¢And Our commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye> 
(54:50) 


So Allah informed us that He created Jesus by merely 
saying, “Be!” and he was, as Allah willed: 


43K SIG BG on KBE Fo JES BI ee fe JG YD 
4Verily, the likeness of ‘Isa (Jesus) before Allah is the likeness of 


(11 At-Tabari 2:550. 


356 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Adam. He created him from dust, then (He) said to him: ‘Be!’ 
~ and he was> (3:59). 


oe SoM SG aS toe Cals Foi CK VS Sis ¥ ad Je 

WORSS pd OT ES BEE EES SUS IG yt 
€118. And those who have no knowledge say: “Why does not 
Allah speak to us (face to face) or why does not a sign come to 
us?” So said the people before them words of similar import. 


Their hearts are alike, We have indeed made plain the signs for 
people who believe with certainty .> 


Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that 
Rafi‘ bin Huraymilah said to the Messenger of Allah 2, “O 
Muhammad! If you were truly a Messenger from Allah, as you 
claim, then ask Allah to speak to us directly, so that we hear 
His Speech.” So Allah revealed, 


ists Cals Hil CK Vel Oks ¥ all Sp 

¢And those who have no knowledge say: “Why does not Allah 

speak to us (face to face) or why does not a sign come to 

us?’pltl 

Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Qatadah and As-Suddi 
said that it was actually the statement of the Arab 
disbelievers: 
<So said the people before them words of similar import .> 

He said, “These are the Jews and the Christians.”!?! 


What further proves that the Arab idolators said the 
statement mentioned in the Ayah is that Allah said, 


Aor ~, 


tend ‘4 4e ata ace Se. te + of 4 RAC Baye ode. oe 
ds at af of $45 Gi UL BE Sb SIG to EE > 


te re -- 

WE Gy ut Ses Af de Sas YT Sl ot Ai, doe 
<i ee 

EG YIRS 


<And when there comes to them a sign (from Allah) they say: 
“We shall not believe until we receive the like of that which the 


[! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:352. 
2! ton Abi Hatim 1:353. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 357 


Messengers of Allah had received.”” Allah knows best with 
whom to place His Message. Humiliation and disgrace from 
Allah and a severe torment will overtake the criminals 
(polytheists and sinners) for that which they used to plot.> 
(6:124) and 


CEES ONY ORE EH OS Sie 
¢And they say: “We shall not believe in you (O Muhammad 


3%), until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for 
us> until, 


4455 GSW LS 3 55 I Sd 


<Say (O Muhammad 23): ‘Glorified (and Exalted) be my Lord 
{(Allah) above all that evil they (polytheists) associate with 
Him]! Am I anything but a man, sent as a Messenger?’ 
(17:90-93) and, 


45 i J KA OE IAG tts AS Y SH Sep 


<And those who expect not a meeting with Us (i.e. those who 
deny the Day of Resurrection and the life of the Hereafter) said : 
“Why are not the angels sent down to us, or why do we not see 
our Lord?’ (25:21) and, 


¢: ae G5 ab 3 pay sal Ase wy b> 


«Nay, everyone of them desires that he should be given pages 
spread out> (74:52). 


There are many other Aydt that testify to the disbelief of the 
Arab idolators, their transgression, stubbornness, and that 
they asked unnecessary questions out of disbelief and 
arrogance. The statements of the Arab idolators followed the 
statements of the nations of the People of the Two Scriptures 
and other religions before them. Allah said, 


BS on Bl ps Yo BAN 3 OS pple I SN Ls Le ateap 
de HES 


<The People of the Scripture (Jews) ask you to cause a book to 
descend upon them from heaven. Indeed, they asked Musa 
(Moses) for even greater than that, when they said: “Show us 


358 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 

Allah in public,’’» (4:153) and, 

ins GF MGS I were 2b o> 
¢And (remember) when you said: ‘““O Musi! We shall never 
believe in you until we see Allah plainly.”’> (2:55). 
Allah’s statement, 
Ces EgeS> 
Their hearts are alike.» 

means, the hearts of the Arab idolators are just like the hearts 
of those before them, containing disbelief, stubbornness and 
injustice. Similarly, Allah said, 

4 ol abe J ACE I oF eal oe St IT a> 
<Likewise, no Messenger came to those before them but they 
said: “A sorcerer or a madman!’’ Have they (the people of the 
past) transmitted this saying to these (Quraysh pagans)?> 
(51:52-53). 

Allah said next, 
4S HW NTE 
«We have indeed made plain the signs for people who believe 
with certainty .> 
meaning, We made the arguments clear, prooving the truth of 
the Messengers, with no need of more questions or proofs for 
those who believe, follow the Messengers and comprehend 
what Allah sent them with. As for those whose hearts and 
hearing Allah has stamped and whose eyes have been sealed, 
Allah described them: 
460 NT otal 


<Truly, those, against whom the Word (wrath) of your Lord 
has been justified, will not believe. Even if every sign should 
come to them, until they see the painful torment} (10:96-97). 


4 pedi ON 3 JB YS B35) Hs Gt, asics GD 
4119. Verily, We have sent you (O Muhammad 3%) with the 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 359 


truth (Islam), a bringer of glad tidings (for those who believe in 
what you brought, that they will enter Paradise) and a warner 
(for those who disbelieve in what you brought, that they will 
enter the Hellfire). And you will not be asked about the dwellers 
of the blazing Fire.> 


Allah’s statement; 


dred oN g JY) 
¢And you will not be asked about the dwellers of the blazing 
Fire.> 


means, “We shall not ask you about the disbelief of those who 
rejected you.” Similarly, Allah said, 


€2icl 4 Are xl aKG gp 


<Your duty is only to convey (the Message) and on Us is the 
reckoning .» (13:40) 


<So remind them (O Muhammad 3%) — you are only one who 
reminds. You are not a dictator over them .}(88:21-22) and, 


diag SE & seth T8  pAG BiG LD 
<We know best what they say. And you (0 Muhammad x3) are 
not the one to force them (to belief). But warn by the Qur'an; 
him who fears My threat} (50:45). 


There are many other similar Aydt. 


The Description of the Prophet % in the Tawrah 


Imam Ahmad recorded ‘Ata’ bin Yasar saying that he met 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin Al-‘As and said to him, “Tell me about 
the description of the Messenger of Allah #% in the Torah.” He 
said, “Yes, by Allah, he is described by the Torah with the same 
characteristics that he is described with in the Qur’4n with: ‘O 
Prophet! We have sent you as a witness, a bringer of good 
news, a warner, and as safe refuge for the unlettered people. 
You are My servant and Messenger. I have called you the 
Mutawakkil (who depends and relies on Allah for each and 
everything). You are not harsh, nor hard, nor obnoxious in the 
bazaars. He does not reward the evil deed with an evil deed. 


360 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Rather, he forgives and pardons. Allah will not bring his life to 
an end, until he straightens the wicked’s religion by his hands 
so that the people proclaim: There is no deity worthy of worship 
except Allah. By his hands, Allah will open blind eyes, deaf ears 
and sealed hearts.’”!'] This was recorded by Al-Bukhari 
only. |?! 
ly SUT 38 oh Sy BL EE Gea Vi syst as ogy Sp 
PE SMW a SS on A oe HO AST op I Sl a haga Each 
CAT DE oy HS oi “a St OI warns KE cas 
€120. Never will the Jews nor the Christians be pleased with 
you (O Muhammad 3) till you follow their religion. Say: 
“Verily, the guidance of Allah (i.e. Islamic Monotheism) that is 
the (only) guidance. And if you (O Muhammad 3%) were to 
follow their (Jews and Christians) desires after what you have 
received of Knowledge (i.e. the Qur'an), then you would have 


against Allah neither any Wali (protector or guardian) nor any 
helper.> 

€121. Those to whom we gave the Book recite it as it should be 
recited (Yatlinahu Haqga Tilawatihi) they are the ones who 
believe therein. And whoso disbelieve in it, those are they who 
are the losers.> 


Ibn Jarir said, “Allah said, 
deel EF Seat Vy hes Be 5 HD 
Never will the Jews nor the Christians be pleased with you (O 
Muhammad x) till you follow their religion .> 


meaning, The Jews and the Christians will never be happy 
with you, O Muhammad! Therefore, do not seek what pleases 
or appeases them, and stick to what pleases Allah by calling 
them to the truth that Allah sent you with.’ Allah’s statement, 


Cicill 3h tid Ey Sid 
€Say: “Verily, the guidance of Allah (i.e. Islamic Monotheism) 
that is the (only) guidance’’> 


) Ahmad 2:174. 
(1 Fath Al-Bari 4:402, 8:449, and Al-Adab Al-Mufrad 72. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 


14 si 
ea kecs EiGMIG Hs 5 Is 


Tele 2 


Zo oe. 


sdodlts, seg go (phils 


ESE ME O SV dly tte, pall 
sy SS f5em i BAT: 5956 Gi es CAST 
Bali Leas O iy SAS 
CHS aAT ERIS AEE a 
rE Sc IBV EE SS, LacZ 
Kiimdse Bae ges 
ee Tier eae 
BIER 


Pasay sihiges 


Z £53 WS I05 Seal 
(nag llal 


ee 35 fra} > 
ee 


eae set Nae Sys AS suet 


Messenger of Allah 3% used to say, 


361 


means, ‘Say, O 
Muhammad 2%, the 
guidance of Allah that 
He sent me with is the 
true guidance, 
meaning the straight, 
perfect and 
comprehensive 
religion.’ !"! Qatadah 
said that Allah’s 
statement, 


$ositif as ait Gi ay i> 
Say: “Verily, — the 
guidance of Allah (i.e. 
Islamic Monotheism) that 
is the (only) guidance> 

is, “A true argument 
that Allah taught 
Muhammad # and 
his Companions and 
which they used 
against the people of 
misguidance,’’!?! 
Qatddah said, “We 
were told that the 


Bo ests oe eB Ae Ge % Het fe i fee ch oe Stl Aes af 
Sm te St pa Y Ga alb Soll de obit (cal Se aah JIG Ye 


- pet t, 
tal ol ol 


‘There will always be a group of my Ummah fighting upon the 
truth, having the upper hand, not harmed by their opponents, 
until the decree of Allah (the Last Hour) comes.s!*! 


This Hadith was collected in the Sahih and narrated from 


‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr.'*1 


(1) At-Tabari 2 :562. 

[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:356. 
(3) fbn Abi Hatim 1:355. 
[41 Muslim 1924. 


362 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
4G i oe Me He Ail 3 3 oh 35 LGN EH isp 
¢And if you (O Muhammad 33) were to follow their (Jews and 
Christians) desires after what you have received of Knowledge 
(i.e. the Qur'an), then you would have against Allah neither 
any Wali (protector or guardian) nor any helper .> 
This Ayah carries a stern warning for the Muslim Ummah 
against imitating the ways and methods of the Jews and 
Christians, after they have acquired knowledge of the Qur’an 
and Sunnah, may Allah grant us refuge from this behavior. 


Although the speech in this Ayah was directed at the 
Messenger 3%, the ruling of which applies to his entire Ummah. 


The Meaning of Correct Tilawah 
Allah said, 


¢Those to whom We gave the Book. Yatlinahu Hagqqan 

Tiléwatih .> 

‘Abdur-Razzaq said # from Ma‘mar, from Qataddah, “They are 
the Jews and Christians.” This is the opinion of ‘Abdur- 
Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam, and it was also chosen by Ibn 
Jarir. Said reported from Qatadah, “They are the Companions 
of the Messenger of Allah 3%.” Abu Al-‘Aliyah said that Ibn 
Mas‘ad said, “By He in Whose Hand is my soul! The right 
Tiawah is allowing what it makes lawful, prohibiting what it 
makes unlawful, reciting it as it was revealed by Allah, not 
changing the words from their places, and not interpreting it 
with other than its actual interpretation.” |"! As-Suddi reported 
from Abu Malik from Ibn ‘Abbas who said about this Ayah 
(2:121): “They make lawful what it allows and they prohibit 
what it makes unlawful, and they do not alter its wordings.”"?! 
‘Umar bin Al-Khattab said, “They are those who when they 
recite an Ayah that mentions mercy, they ask Allah for it, and 
when they recite an Ayah that mentions torment, they seek 
refuge with Allah from it.”*! This meaning was attributed to 


(! At-Tabari 2:567. 
21 At-Tabari 2:567. 
3) Al-Qurtubi 2:95. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 363 


the Prophet 3, for when he used to recite an Ayah of mercy, he 
invoked Allah for mercy, and when he recited an Ayah of 
torment, he sought refuge from it with Allah." 

Allah’s statement, 


€4 S38 GSN> 
<they are the ones who believe therein} 
explains the Ayah, 
425555 F BE, SH ESE Gall 

<Those to whom We gave the Book. Yatlinahu Hagqa 

Tilawatihi>. 
These Aydt mean, “Those among the People of the Book who 

perfectly adhered to the Books that were revealed to the 


previous Prophets, will believe in what I have sent you with, O 
Muhammad!” Allah said in another Ayah, 
Bh 508 on NEN 5 of och St Os Lah SBI il el > 
. toys 
<And if only they had acted according to the Tawrah, the Injil, 
and what has (now) been sent down to them from their Lord 
(the Qur'an), they would surely, have gotten provision from 
above them and from underneath their feet.> (5:66). The Ayah, 


of Ky SA LeayG OA te SSE EI oS DE SD 
45535 
<Say (O Muhammad 3%) “‘O People of the Scripture (Jews and 
Christians)! You have nothing (as regards guidance) till you act 
according to the Tawrah, the Injil, and what has (now) been 
sent down to you from your Lord (the Qur’an).’"> 
means, “If you adhere to the Torah and the Gospel in the 
correct manner, believe in them as you should, and believe in 
the news they carry about Muhammad’s prophethood, his 
description and the command to follow, aid and support him, 


then this will direct you to adhere to truth and righteousness 
in this life and the Hereafter.” In another Ayah, Allah said, 


(1! Ibn Majah 429. 


364 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


“ 


BOs Gg phbe WG A532 ol AN SBI StI oA Sip 


ra 


tah 


<Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet who can neither 
read nor write (i.e. Muhammad 2%) whom they find written 
with them in the Tawrdh and the Injil.> (7:157) and, 


CONTA 6 Aes 4 GS SR Ses oe 
<Say (O Muhammad 3% to them): ‘Believe in it (the Qur'an) 
or do not believe (in it). Verily, those who were given 
knowledge before it, when it is recited to them, fall down on 
their faces in humble prostration. And they say: ‘Glory be to 
our Lord! Truly, the promise of our Lord must be fulfilled.’’> 
(17:107-108). 

These Aydt indicate that what Allah promised for 
Muhammad 3 will certainly occur. Allah also said, 

Sy oy CE TG pele EG SEE oy hs oe CEST I Geall 
Those to whom We gave the Scripture (i.e. the Tawrah and 
the Injil) before it, they believe in it (the Qur’aén). And when it 
is recited to them, they say: ‘We believe in it. Verily, it is the 
truth from our Lord. Indeed even before it we have been from 
those who submit themselves to Allah in Islam as Muslims. 
These will be given their reward twice over, because they are 
patient, and repel evil with good, and spend (in charity) out of 
what We have provided them.> (28:52-54) and, 


Saeze ¢ 


C35 TF ys Bice 5 YT og Cech sedis casi BF gi b> 
¢And say to those who were given the Scripture (Jews and 
Christians) and to those who are illiterates (Arab pagans): ‘Do 
you (also) submit yourselves (to Allah in Islam)?” If they do, 
they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, your duty is 
only to convey the Message; and Allah is the Seer of (His) 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 365 


servants> (3:20). 
Allah said, 
ix Kl 2 BSN 2 IS wd 
¢And whoever disbelieves in it (the Qur'an), those are they who 
are the losers>, just as He said in another Ayah, 


hes 3b IAT & oy 2S oS 
«But those of the sects (Jews, Christians and all the other non- 
Muslim nations) that reject it (the Qur'an), the Fire will be 
their promised meeting place> (11:17). 


As recorded in the Sahih, the Prophet # said, 
SB Vo a NG Sess HW ye hy GH Yon 8 gale 
5G 485 Vy 


«By He in Whose Hand is my soul! There is no member of this 
Ummah (mankind and Jinns), Jew or a Christian, who hears of 
me, yet does not believe in me, but will enter the Fire.»!") 


Y Gy EG eect RUGS ly Sele LN ash ots LAST boy gad 
Cimayet AY Ee Gat Gh Ie ee I CES 2 OS FZ 

€122. O Children of Israel! Remember My favor which I 

bestowed upon you and that I preferred you over the nations).> 


€123. And fear the Day (of Judgement) when no person shall 
avail another, nor shall compensation be accepted from him, nor 
shall intercession be of use to him, nor shall they be helped .> 


We mentioned a similar Ayah at the beginning of this Sarah, 
and it is mentioned here to emphisize the importance of 
following the Ummi Prophet and Messenger, who is described 
for the People of the Scriptures in their Books by his 
characteristics, name, the good news about him and the 
description of his Ummah. Allah warned them against 
concealing this information, which is among the favors that 
Allah granted them. Allah also commanded them to remember 
their daily life and their religious affairs and how He blessed 


(1) Muslim 1:134. 


366 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


them. They should not envy their cousins, the Arabs, for what 
Allah has given them, the Final Messenger of Allah being an 
Arab. Envy should not incite them to oppose or deny the 
Prophet or refrain from following him, may Allah’s peace and 
blessings be upon him until the Day of Judgment. 


JG S58 ond JE Mey HY Shee Sy 56 BSE ok Bs sans Set as BED 

Enc inet cule Je 9 
4124. And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim (Abraham) 
tried him with (certain) commands, which he fulfilled. He 
(Allah) said (to him), “Verily, I am going to make you an 
Imam (a leader) for mankind (to follow you).”” (Ibrahim) said, 
“And of my offspring (to make leaders). (Allah) said, “My 


covenant (prophethood) includes not Zalimin (polytheists and 
wrongdoers) ."’> 


Ibrahim Al-Khalil was an Imam for the People 
Allah is informing us of the honor of Ibrahim Al-Khalil, who 
He made an Imam for the people, and a model to be imitated, 
because of the way he conducted himself and adhered to 
Tawhid. This honor was given to Prophet Ibrahim when he 
adhered to Allah’s decisions and prohibitions. This is why 
Allah said, 
4255 1 ca, EE 35> 
¢And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim (i.e., Allah) tried 
him with (certain) commands>. 


This Ayah means, O Muhammad! Remind the idolators and 
the People of the Scriptures, who pretend to be followers of the 
religion of Ibrahim, while in reality they do not follow it, while 
you, O Muhammad, and your followers are the true followers 
of his religion; remind them of the commands and prohibitions 
that Allah tested Ibrahim with. 

ees 
which he fulfilled .> 


indicating that Ibrahim implemented all of Allah’s orders. Allah 
said in another Ayah, 


45085 cll Laly> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 367 


<And of Ibrahim (Abraham) who fulfilled (or conveyed) all that 
(Allah ordered him to do or convey)> (53:37) 
meaning, he was truthful and he was obedient to Allah’s 
legislation. Also, Allah said, 


Aceh £28 a 


aeoyY Vest OSEN & 5 2 ot es Ab aoe cin E> 
‘Baiat 3 BS a eo hi se WESN5 MWe bie J] 2305 
4 BSE 3, GCs Sask i A ah CS 


<Verily, [brahim was an Ummah (or a nation), obedient to 
Allah, Hanif (i.e. to worship none but Allah), and he was not 
one of those who were Al-Mushrikin (polytheists), (He was) 
thankful for His (Allah’s) favors. He (Allah) chose him and 
guided him to a straight path. And We gave him good in this 
world, and in the Hereafter he shall be of the righteous. Then, 
We have sent the revelation to you (O Muhammad 2% saying): 
“Follow the religion of Ibrahim Hanif (Islamic Monotheism —- 
to worship none but Allah) and he was not of the Mushrikin.> 
(16:120-123) 


we 6 Gots wb Ge wt we AG oh oh B® 

43g 
Say (O Muhammad 3): “Truly, my Lord has guided me to a 
straight path, a right religion, the religion of Ibrahim, Hanifan, 


and Ibrahim (to worship none but Allah, alone) and he was not 
ncntiaines pee, and, 

” & Weal 45 “ay tex ee “i 65 _ 5505 atthe tit Sf 
<Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a true 
Muslim Hanifan (Islamic Monotheism — to worship none but 
Allah alone) and he was not of Al-Mushrikin. Verily, among 
mankind who have the best claim to Ibrahim are those who 
followed him, and this Prophet (Muhammad 33) and those who 
have believed (Muslims). And Allah is the Wali (Protector and 
Helper) of the believers} (3:67-68). 

Allah said, 


<6) 


368 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
with Kalimat (words)> 


which means, “Laws, commandments and prohibitions.” 
‘Words’ as mentioned here, sometimes refers to what Allah has 
willed, such as Allah’s statement about Maryam, 


Ciael S BG 5 5 SK S515) 
¢And she testified to the truth of the Words of her Lord, and 


(also believed in) His Scriptures, and she was of the Qanitin 
(i.e. obedient to Allah)» (66:12). 


“Words” also refers to Allah’s Law, such as Allah’s statement, 
€9555 Ge 5 BF 255 
<And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled in truth and in 
Justice> (6:115) 


meaning, His legislation. “Words” also means truthful news, or 
a just commandment or prohibition. For instance, Allah said, 


hare a hens 
CH kK 5 Jai) SEL aby 


€And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim tried him with 
(certain) Words (commands), which he fulfilled» 


meaning, he adhered to them, Allah said, 
Ky td He yp 


¢“Verily, I am going to make you an Imém (a leader) for 
mankind (to follow you).’’> 


as a reward for Ibrahim’s good deeds, adhering to the 
commandments and avoiding the prohibitions. This is why 
Allah made Ibrahim a role model for the people, and an Imam 
whose conduct and path are imitated and followed. 


What were the Words that Ibrahim was tested with? 
There is a difference of opinion over the words that Allah 
tested Ibrahim with. There are several opinions attributed to 
Ibn ‘Abbas. For instance, ‘Abdur-Razzaq said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
said, “Allah tested him with the rituals (of Haj).”""! Abu Ishaq 
reported the same.”! ‘Abdur-Razz4q also narrated that Ibn 


(! At-Tabari 3:13. 
2) Ibid. 


Strah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 369 
‘Abbas said that, 
42K 1 Sony SET 35> 
And (remember) when the Lord of Ibrahim (Abraham) (i.e., 
Allah) tried him with (certain) commands> 


means, “Allah tested him with Tahdrah (purity, ablution): five 
on the head and five on the body. As for the head, they are 
cutting the mustache, rinsing the mouth, inhaling and 
discarding water, using Siwdk and parting the hair. As for the 
body, they are trimming the nails, shaving the pubic hair, 
circumcision and plucking under the arm and washing with 
water after answering the call of nature.”!! Ibn Abi Hatim 
said, “A similar statement was also reported from Sa‘id bin Al- 
Musayyib, Mujahid, Ash-Sha‘bi, An-Nakhai, Abu Salih, Abu 
Al-Jald, and so forth.” 
There is a similar statement that Imam Muslim narrated 
from ‘A’ishah who said that Allah’s Messenger 2 said, 
Jay ch Guten Sigsng eA ey, St Gad saphall Ge phen 
Vp spt E55 th Gols Stal Glog NN Lats get Jobs ubY 
Gao al 5 5 if 


‘Ten are among the Fitrah (instinct, natural constitution) : 
trimming the mustache, growing the beard, using Siwak, 
inhaling and then exhaling water (in ablution), cutting the 
nails, washing between the fingers (in ablution), plucking the 
underarm hair, shaving the pubic hair, washing with water 
after answering the call of nature, (and | forgot the tenth, I 
think it was) rinsing the mouth (in ablution).»'*! 


The Two Sahihs recorded Abu Hurayrah saying that the 
Prophet 22 said, 
et 5 ubY 355 SLE Gals SAG Oued 528 Shido 
(Five are among the acts of Fitrah: circumcision, shaving the 


pubic hair, trimming the mustache, cutting the nails and 
plucking the underarm hair.» This is the wording with 


1] ‘Abdur-Razzaq 1:57. 
[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:359. 
13) Muslim 1:223. 


370 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Muslim.,!! 


Muhammad bin Ishaq reportd that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The 
words that Allah tested Ibrahim with, and that he 
implemented were: abandoning his (disbelieving) people when 
Allah commanded him to do so, disputing with Nimrod (king of 
Babylon) about Allah, being patient when he was thrown in 
the fire (although this was extremely traumatic) migrating from 
his homeland when Allah commanded him to do so, patience 
with the monetary and material demands of hosting guests by 
Allah’s command, and Allah’s order for him to slaughter his 
son. When Allah tested Ibrahim with these words, and he was 
ready for the major test, Allah said to him, 


Kinch oo) LAN 36 lp 


<“Submit (be a Muslim)!” He said, “I have submitted myself 
(as a Muslim) to the Lord of all that exists.’’> (2:131) 


although this meant defying and being apart from the 
people.”!?! 


The Unjust do not qualify for Allah’s Promise 
Allah said that Ibrahim said, 


dages 


ae 
¢And of my offspring (to make leaders)> and Allah replied, 
iil wate JED 


<My covenant (prophethood) includes not Zalimin (polytheists 
and wrongdoers)>. 


When Allah made Ibrahim an Imam (Leader for the faithful), 
he asked Allah that Imams thereafter be chosen from his 
offspring. Allah accepted his supplication, but told him that 
there will be unjust people among his offspring and they will 
not benefit from Allah’s promise. Thus, they will neither 
become Imams nor be imitated (for they will not be righteous). 
The proof that Ibrahim’s supplication to Allah was accepted is 
that Allah said in Surat Al-‘Ankabit (29:27), 


") Fath Al-Bari 10:347 and Muslim 1:222. 
2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:360. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 ee eee 


<And We ordained among his offspring prophethood and the 
Book>. 


Hence, every Prophet whom Allah sent after Ibrahim were 
from among his offspring, and every Book that Allah revealed 
was to them. As for Allah’s statement, 


iui cage Jie ¥ IG> 
<(Allah) said, “My covenant (prophethood) includes not 
Zalimin (polytheists and wrongdoers).’’> 


Allah mentioned that there are unjust people among the 
offspring of Ibrahim, and they will not benefit from Allah’s 
promise, nor would they be entrusted with anything, even 
though they are among the children of Allah’s Khalil (intimate 
friend, Prophet Abraham). There will also be those who do 
good among the children of Ibrahim, and these it is who will 
benefit from Ibrahim’s supplication. Ibn Jarir said that this 
Ayah indicated that the unjust shall not be Imams for the 
people. Moreover, the Ayah informed Ibrahim that there will be 
unjust people among his offspring. Also, Ibn Khuwayz Mindad 
Al-Maliki said, “The unjust person does not qualify to be a 
Khalifah, a ruler, one who gives religious verdicts, a witness, 
or even a narrator (of Hadiths).” 


4125. And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka’bah 
at Makkah) a place of resort for mankind and a place of safety. 


And take you (people) the Magam (place) of Ibrahim (or the 
stone on which Ibrahim as a place> 


The Virtue of Allah’s House : 


Al-‘Awfi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on Allah’s 
statement, 


¢And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka’bah at 
Makkah) a place of resort for mankind> 


“They do not remain in the House, they only visit it and return 


deni HE exit Ap 


372 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


to their homes, and then visit it again.” Also, Abu Jafar Ar- 
Razi narrated from Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas from Abu Al-‘Aliyah who 
said that, 


CEH Gh SE ait cE Sapp 
¢And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka‘bah at 
Makkah) a place of resort for mankind and a place of safety> 


means, “Safe from enemies and armed conflict. During the 
time of Jahiliyyah, the people were often victims of raids and 
kidnapping, while the people in the area surrounding it (Al- 
Masjid Al-Hardm) were safe and not subject to kidnapping.” 
Also, Mujahid, ‘Ata’, As-Suddi, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas 
were reported to have said that the Ayah (2:125) means, 
“Whoever enters it shall be safe.’!?! 

This Ayah indicates that Allah honored the Sacred House, 
which Allah made as a safe refuge and safe haven. Therefore, 
the souls are eager, but never bored, to conduct short visits to 
the House, even every year. This is because Allah accepted the 
supplication of His Khalil, Ibrahim, when he asked Allah to 
make the hearts of people eager to visit the House. Ibrahim 
said (14:40), 


eles SESS ib 
<Our Lord! And accept my invocation». 

Allah described the House as a safe resort and refuge, for 
those who visit it are safe, even if they had committed acts of 
evil. This honor comes from the honor of the person who built 
it first, Khalil Ar-Rahman, just as Allah said, 

d63 4 BEVIS ot o& sy ly yp 


€And (remember) when We showed Ibrahim the site of the 
(Sacred) House (the Ka‘bah at Makkah) (saying): ‘‘Associate not 
anything (in worship) with Me...’’> (22:26) and, 


So Beer fae 6 ae Ob ek Ce me ¢ s “4 
fe ese ES as al os BU BS oll Ut Go) ok TT > 


a tJ 
Se 1S ale o “e 
OK BO AES 235 Sy 


ry 


Hl At-Tabari 3:29. 
2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :370. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1 373 


«Verily, the first House (of worship) appointed for mankind was 
that at Bakkah (Makkah), full of blessing, and a guidance for 
Al-‘Alamin (mankind and Jinn). In it are manifest signs (for 
example), the Magam (place) of Ibrahim; whosoever enters it, 
he attains security> (3:96-97). 


The last honorable Ayah emphasized the honor of Ibrahim’s 
Magqadm, and the instruction to pray next to it, 


) 
CSE sat) AS» DOD 


¢And take you (people) the Magam (place) of Ibrahim as a place 
of prayer>. 


The Maqgam of Ibrahim 


Sufyan Ath-Thawri reported that Sa‘id bin Jubayr 
commented on the Ayah, 


4S Sash AE ow Wed 

¢And take you (people) the Magam (place) of Ibrahim as a place 

of prayer> 
“The stone (Maqdam) is the standing place of Ibrahim, Allah’s 
Prophet, and a mercy from Allah. Ibrahim stood on the stone, 
while Isma‘l was handing him the stones (constructing the 
Ka‘bah).”"") As-Suddi said, “The Magam of Ibrahim is a stone 
which Isma‘il’s wife put under Ibrahim’s feet when washing his 
head."!?] Al-Qurtubi mentioned this, but he considered it 
unauthentic, although others gave it prefrence, Ar-Razi 
reported it in his Tafsir from Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Qatadah, and 
Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.!*! 

Ibn Abi Hatim reported that Jabir, describing the Hajj 

(pilgrimage) of the Prophet 2#§ said, “When the Prophet i 
performed Tawdf, ‘Umar asked him, 1s this the Maqdm of our 


father?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ Umar said, ‘Should we take it a place of 
prayer?’ So Allah revealed, 


“; ‘ ee os te 
€ jai Kast AE y LAL > 


(1 thn Abi Hatim 1:371. 
21 at-Tabari 3:35. 
IS] Ar-Razi 4:45. 


374 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢And take you (people) the Magi (place) of Ibrahim 
(Abraham) as a place of prayer .'’>'"! 


Al-Bukhari said, “Chapter: Allah’s statement, 
$a: Kail AE op help 


¢And take you (people) the Maqam (place) of Ibrahim 

(Abraham) as a place of prayer> 
meaning, they return to it repeatedly.” He then narrated that 
Anas bin Malik said that ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab said, “I agreed 
with my Lord, or my Lord agreed with me, regarding three 
matters. I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! I wish you take the 
Magam of Ibrahim a place for prayer.’ The Ayah, 

45S fas AE» 26> 

€And take you (people) the Magim (place) of Ibrahim 

(Abraham)> 
was revealed. I also said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! The righteous 
and the wicked enter your house. I wish you would command 
the Mothers of the believers (the Prophet’s wives) to wear 
Hijab. Allah sent down the Ayah that required the Hijab. And 
when I knew that the Prophet #% was angry with some of his 
wives, I came to them and said, ‘Either you stop what you are 
doing, or Allah will endow His Messenger with better women 
than you are.’ I advised one of his wives and she said to me, ‘O 
‘Umar! Does the Messenger of Allah not know how to advise his 
wives, so that you have to do the job instead of him?’ Allah 
then revealed, 


q42 a te est PA o ah ol iy we? 


qlt may be if he divorced you (all) that his Lord will give him 
instead of you, wives better than you, — Muslims (who submit 
to Allah)>.” (66:5) 


Also, Ibn Jarir narrated that Jabir said, “After the Messenger 
of Allah kissed the Black Stone, he went around the house 
three times in a fast pace and four times in a slow pace. He 
then went to Magam of Ibrahim, with it between him and the 
House, and prayed two Rak‘ahs.”?! This is part of the long 


(1) Tbn Abi Hatim 1:370. 
[21 at-Tabari 3:36. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (101 - 124) (Part-1) 375 


Hadith that Muslim recorded in Sahih.'"! Al-Bukhari recorded 
that ‘Amr bin Dinar said that he heard Ibn Umar say, “The 
Messenger of Allah 2% performed Tawdf around the House 
seven times and then prayed two Rak‘ahs behind the 
Magam."**1 

All these texts indicate that the Maqdadm is the stone that 
Ibrahim was standing on while building the House. As the 
House’s walls became higher, Ismail brought his father a 
stone, so that he could stand on it, while Ismail handed him 
the stones. Ibrahim would place the stones on the wall, and 
whenever he finished one side, he would move to the next 
side, to complete the building all around. Ibrahim kept 
repeating this until he finished building the House, as we will 
describe when we explain the story of Ibrahim and Isma‘l and 
how they built the House, as narrated from Ibn ‘Abbas and 
collected by Al-Bukhari. Ibrahim’s footprints were still visible 
in the stone, and the Arabs knew this fact during the time of 
Jahiliyyah. This is why Abu Talib said in his poem known as 
‘Al-Lamiyyah’, “And Ibrahim’s footprint with his bare feet on 
the stone is still visible.” 

The Muslims also saw Ibrahim’s footprints on the stone, as 
Anas bin Malik said, “I saw the Maqdm with the print of 
Ibrahim’s toes and feet still visible in it, but the footprints 
dissipated because of the people rubbing the stone with their 
hands.” 

Earlier, the Maqdm was placed close to the Ka‘bah’s wall. In 
the present time, the Maqgam is placed next to Al-Hijr on the 
right side of those entering through the door. 

When Ibrahim finished building the House, he placed the 
stone next to the wall of Al-Ka‘bah. Or, when the House was 
finished being built, Ibrahim just left the stone where it was 
last standing, and he was commanded to pray next to the 
stone when he finished the Tawéf (circumambulating). It is 
understandable that the Maqdm of Ibrahim would stand where 
the building of the House ended. The Leader of the faithful 
‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, one of the Four Rightly Guided Caliphs 
whom we were commanded to emulate, moved the stone away 


1) Muslim 2:920. 
(2) Fath Al-Bari 3 :586. 


376 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


from the Ka‘bah’s wall during his reign. Umar is one of the 
two men, whom the Messenger of Allah # described when he 
said, 3 <6 sue 

5225 XS ol wae fe AAU 1,55 
imitate the two men who will come after me: Abu Bakr and 
‘Umar.0!1 


‘Umar was also the person whom the Qur’aén agreed with 
regarding praying next to Maqdm of Ibrahim. This is why none 
among the Companions rejected it when he moved it. 

‘Abdur-Razzaq reported from Ibn Jurayj from ‘Ata’, “ Umar 
bin Al-Khattab moved the Maqgdm back.” Also, ‘Abdur-Razzaq 
narrated that Mujahid said that ‘Umar was the first person 
who moved the Magam back to where it is now standing.” Al- 
Hafiz Abu Bakr, Ahmad bin ‘Ali bin Al-Husayn Al-Bayhaqi 
recorded ‘A’ishah saying, “During the time of the Messenger of 
Allah and Abu Bakr, the Maqdm was right next to the House. 
‘Umar moved the Maqdm during his reign.” This Hadith has 
an authentic chain of narration. 


42 0g Sin ° % 42. la Ort Caan (CT 4 ee oe “ Wee ve 
Jo 5 Waa peas Susi Gules Go byb I Setiy5 Zeast Ty Biye5> 
4 oe Ws ot Se aie oe © Frye oF oo ad “0% tet 4 Of Le bret oe ° 
E 5 SBM LO Be te Se SBI So fiat GG thn Gh as Sat gy test 

Loo pete 


atte ee tte 5 pte ee a ote Lge Mave a7 4, phe se 3h ont 
call & Seta Zee BFS OM ae! Gy OUT gids ay LSI fs Lo Ace 


2 


2 


tJ 
ia! 2 Sok Pe 7,4 wre Perel Soe ie oe oo “3, <2 O80 the OB ee 
Gh 45 Bat eG im al A. a EG Ses 
m3 ae ede BEN AES Mean, ede ee eer eo ee foe 
iy Doh Bi CA Hy TE EL OG of 


€125. And We commanded Ibrahim (Abraham) and Isma‘il 
(Ishmael) that they should purify My House (the Ka‘bah at 
Makkah) for those who are circumambulating it, or staying 
(I'tikaf), or bowing or prostrating themselves (there, in 
prayer) .> 

€126. And (remember) when Ibrahim said, “My Lord, make 
this city (Makkah) a place of security and provide its people 
with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day.” 
He (Allah) answered: “As for him who disbelieves, I shall leave 
him in contentment for a while, then I shall compel him to the 
torment of the Fire, and worst indeed is that destination!"’> 


0) Tyhfat Al-Ahwadhi :569. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 377 


sai: Ys EBM 4127. And (remember) 
ReiCan or edna i Sel ait renis TORE when Ibrahim and (his 


son) Isma‘il were raising 
geet S o mas ROUEN the foundations of the 
tac oe House (the Ka‘bah at 
ut Makkah), (saying), 
Genus ner 6 et | | “Our Lord! Accept (this 
i; “SSH BIS ashe 2c Aes service) from us. Verily, 
Hinges ciste ab You re Hearer, the 
Asi Osi slelaye S35 || Knower.’’> 
ety et the k otee 4128. “Our Lord! And 
ye ee ee ww. ve make us submissive unto 
You and of our offspring 
a nation submissive 
unto You, and show us 


2-7 
he 


ges 


ee sets eclde 
sas et 5 gc tty heres 5? 298305 our Manasik, and accept 
pad Shel 


Tech tk ac eyed - our repentance. Truly, 
cael @s¢ 4i\9 || You are the One Who 


pet alte ad A SU a 5 5625 accepts repentance, the 


~ ee || Most Merciful.> 
ss: nieces 
7 tae 02 Bek ee eee The Command to 
ais Bsr Ae near, 


Paras 33 a5 purify the House 
iiciseecsientens cect Al-Hasan Al-Basri 
said that, 

C5215 as Sy ByS5> 
¢And We gave Our ‘Ahd (command) to Ibrahim and Ismail» 


means, “Allah ordered them to purify it from all filth and 
impurities, of which none should ever touch it.”!! Also, Ibn 
Jurayj said, “I said to ‘Ata’, ‘What is Allah’s ‘Ahd?’ He said, 
‘His command.’” Also, Said bin Jubayr said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
commented on the Ayah, 


45555 Salty GS UG of 


<that they should purify My bibiise (the Ka‘bah) for those who 
are circumambulating it, or staying (I'tikaf)> 


0) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:373. 


378 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
“Purify it from the idols.” Further, Mujahid and Sa‘d bin 
Jubayr said that, 
<inaly Go FbD 
<purify My House for those who are circumambulating it> 
means, “From the idols, sexual activity, false witness and sins 
of all kinds.” 
Allah said, 
€ixalb > 
<for those who are performing Tawaf (circumambulating) it>. 
The Tawdf around the House is a well-established ritual, 

Sa‘id bin Jubayr said that, 

xslt > 

for those who are circumambulating it» 

means, strangers (he means who do not live in Makkah), 
while; 

€inscsi > 

¢or staying (I'tikaf)> 
is about those who live in the area of the Sacred House.!'! 
Also, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said that I‘tikaf is in 
reference to those who live in the area of the House, just as 
Said bin Jubayr stated. Allah said, 
aputtl Zens > 
<or bowing or prostrating themselves (there, in prayer)> 


Ibn ‘Abbas said, when it is a place of prayer it includes those 
who are described as bowing and prostrating themselves.'*! 
Also, ‘Ata’ and Qatadah offered the same Tafsir.'*) 

Purifying all Masjids is required according to this Ayah and 
according to Allah’s statement, 


CICS GU GARG eS GIS ot 
I'l ton Abi Hatim 1:375. 
2) Ibid. 


[31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:376. 
41 tid. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 379 


<In houses (mosques) which Allah has ordered to be raised (to 
be cleaned, and to be honored), in them His Name is 
remembered (i.e. Adhan, Iqamah, Salah, invocations, recitation 
of the Qur‘an). Therein glorify Him (Allah) in the mornings 
and in the (late) afternoons> (24:36). 
There are many Hadiths that give a general order for 
purifying the Masjids and keeping filth and impurities away 
from them. This is why the Prophet 2 said, 


Wes ude oe ep 
‘The Masjids are established for the purpose that they were 
built for (i.e. worshipping Allah alone) .0'"| 


I have collected a book on this subject, and all praise is due 
to Allah. 


Makkah is a Sacred Area 
Allah said, 
aids Sh ts Sle SBN Ge AN AG OS eat os teas SE gp 


<i 


¢And (remember) when Ibrahim said, “My Lord, make this city 
(Makkah) a place of security and provide its people with fruits, 
such of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day.”’> 
Imam Abu Ja‘ar bin Jarir At-Tabari narrated that Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah said that the Messenger of Allah # said, 


sla  UEY 35 G Sad Lets fy hy at Se BS tt Sp 

Alas chi V5 Gils 
(brahim made Allah's House a Sacred Area and a safe refuge. 
I have made what is between the two sides of Al-Madinah a 
Sacred Area. Therefore, its game should not be hunted, and its 


trees should not be cut.!?) An-Nasai*! and Muslim"! also 
recorded this Hadith. ! 


(1 Muslim 1:397. 
(2) At-Tabari 3:47. 
(31 An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubré 2:487. 
(41 Muslim 2 :992. 


380 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


There are several other Hadiths that indicate that Allah 
made Makkah a sacred area before He created the heavens 
and earth. The Two Sahihs recorded ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas 
saying that the Messenger of Allah 2 said, 


Cl al BIA, BS 3 Ko IAS GE py GI als sich vis op 
DM be BEY YD dei bs BBN 5 Jel Js 9 Sy tal pg 
Ligh; V5 the V5 Spb Lae V cal (dy a EH, BS 
SoS Vy ait yy Ge th SW ew YL Vg ie i Vy ch 

cSt Vp Sus hy pat Op 
tAllah has made this city a sanctuary (sacred place) the Day He 
created the heavens and earth. Therefore, it is a sanctuary until 
the Day of Resurrection because Allah made it a sanctuary. It 
was not legal for anyone to fight in it before me, and it was 
legal for me for a few hours of one day. Therefore, it is a 
sanctuary until the Day of Resurrection, because Allah made it 
a sanctuary. None is allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs, or to 
chase its game, or to pick up something that has fallen, except 
by a person who announces it publicly, nor should any of its 
trees be cut.¥ Al-‘Abbas said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Except 


the lemon-grass, for our goldsmiths and for our graves.’ 
The Prophet added, «Except lemon-grass.0!"! 


This is the wording of Muslim. The Two Sahihs also recorded 
Abu Hurayrah narrating a similar Hadith, while Al-Bukhari 
recorded a similar Hadith from Safiyyah bint Shaybah who 
narrated it from the Prophet 3./! 

Abu Shurayh Al-‘Adawi said that he said to ‘Amr bin Sa‘id 
while he was sending armies to Makkah, “O Commander! Let 
me narrate a Hadith that the Messenger of Allah #% said the 
day that followed the victory of Makkah. My ears heard the 
Hadith, my heart comprehended it, and my eyes saw the 
Prophet #% when he said it. He thanked Allah and praised him 
and then said, 


< se Je ’ ry ° ee Ce ee reer ote Is pepe, 205-3 
elegy ab US es A) oe UI ee 5 al ee Se Op, 


(1) Fath ALBari 4:56, and Muslim 2:986. 
(21 Fath ALBari 3 :253. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 381 
BB ON) Sey Gas LEN Op EE dat V5 US & dus 
B56 fp BE Gs Bat ly 35 5 tt Saf ar Sy J 

els Lott ae Ve Ga hs od ase Siu 
‘Allah, not the people, made Makkah a sanctuary, so any 
person who has belief in Allah and the Last Day, should neither 
shed blood in it nor should he cut down its trees. If anybody 
argues that fighting in it is permissible on the basis that Allah’s 
Messenger fought in Makkah, say to him, ‘Allah allowed His 
Messenger and did not allow you.’ Allah allowed me only for a 
few hours on that day (of the Conquest), and today its sanctity 


is valid as it was before. So, those who are present should 
inform those who are absent (concerning this fact).» 


Abu Shurayh was asked, ‘What did ‘Amr reply?’ He said, 
(Amr said) ‘O Abu Shurayh! I know better than you about 
this, the Sacred House does not give protection to a sinner, a 
murderer or a thief.’ This Hadith was collected by Al-Bukhari 
and Muslim!!! 

After this, there is no contradiction between the Hadiths that 
stated that Allah made Makkah a sanctuary when He created 
the heavens and earth and the Hadiths that Ibrahim made it a 
sanctuary, since Ibrahim conveyed Allah’s decree that Makkah 
is a sanctuary, before he built the House. Similarly, the 
Messenger of Allah 3% was written as the Final Prophet when 
Adam was still clay. Yet, Ibrahim said, 


75 TS peo Sa CD 
Our Lord! Send amongst them a Messenger of their own> 
(2:129). 


Allah accepted Ibrahim’s supplication, although He had full 
knowledge beforehand that it will occur by His decree. To 
further elaborate on this subject, we should mention the 
Hadith about what the Messenger of Allah 3% said when he was 
asked, “O Messenger of Allah! Tell us about how your 
prophethood started.” He 2% said, 


CF BE Al oh ae ol one SS a cle ot) al 8585 


(1 Fath Al-Bari 4:50, and Muslim 2 :987. 


382 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
epi 4 pad J Lett 555 gs 


t! am the supplication of my father Ibrahim, the good news of 
Jesus, the son of Mary, and my mother saw a light that 
radiated from her which illuminated the castles of Ash-Sham 
(Syria) 2!) 
In this Hadith, the Companions asked the Messenger 3% 
about the beginning of his prophethood. We will explain this 
matter later, if Allah wills. 


Ibrahim invokes Allah to make Makkah an Area of 
Safety and Sustenance 


Allah said that Ibrahim said, 

4G. OH Os JT God 
éMy Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security> 
(2:126) 


from terror, so that its people do not suffer from fear. Allah 


accepted Ibrahim’s supplication. Allah said, 
Ete 06 HES x5 


Whosoever enters it, he attains security> (3:97) and, 
Cas b Sal GS tn os ee OG Ib 


<Have they not seen that We have made (Makkah) a secure 
sanctuary, while men are being snatched away from all around 
them?> (29:67). 


We have already mentioned the Hadiths that prohibit fighting 
in the Sacred Area. Muslim recorded that Jabir said that the 
Messenger of Allah 2 said, 


rer Ky as SFY Spa Ve 


«No one is allowed to carry weapons in Makkah.v'?! Allah 
mentioned that Ibrahim said, 


qi OG Ok ST 5p 


11] Ahmad 5 :262. 
[2] Muslim 2 :989. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 383 
My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security> 


meaning, make this a safe city. This occurred before the 
Ka‘bah was built. Allah said in Surat Ibrahim, 


460 oS Jat 35 pal J6 55> 
¢And (remember) when Ibrahim said, “My Lord! Make this 
city (Makkah) one of peace and security..."> (14:35) 
as here, Ibrahim supplicated a second time after the House 
was built and its people lived around it, after Ishaq who was 
thirteen years Ismail’s junior was born. This is why at the 
end of his supplication, Ibrahim said here, 


te 58 Sy Ly SI Boe oi A iD 
€All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has given me in 


old age Isma‘il (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac). Verily, my Lord is 
indeed the Hearer of invocations> (14:39). 


Allah said next, 

iedl bs Reh 5 S6 BST asi BG ate Gone eT Ge al ASOD 
Cs 55 Ji ye § 

¢"...and provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe 
in Allah and the Last Day.” He (Allah) answered : ‘As for him 
who disbelieves, I shall leave him in contentment for a while, 
then I shall compel him to the torment of the Fire, and worst 
indeed is that destination!) 

Ibn Jarir said that Ubayy bin Ka‘b commented on, 


* oy M20 ae vet go Speke ree 4 4 
dhol Shs gt ide Sy tbat es REE IS 5 SUD 


¢He answered; “As for him who disbelieves, | shall leave him 
in contentment for a while, then I shall compel him to the 
torment of the Fire, and worst indeed is that destination!’’> 


“These are Allah’s Words (meaning not Ibrahim’s)”'! This is 
also the Tafsir of Mujahid and ‘Tkrimah.'?! Furthermore, Ibn 


Abi Hatim narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on Allah’s 
statement, 


(1) At-Tabari 3:53. 
2) At-Tabari 3:54. 


384 Tafsir_Ibn_ Kathir 


4551 0 oh oe OFA ‘ial GG ane oh vs Jeet o> 


4My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security and 
provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah 
and the Last Day.> 


“Ibrahim asked Allah to grant sustenance for the believers 
only. However, Allah revealed, 1 will also provide for the 
disbelievers, just as I shall provide for the believers. Would I 
create something and not sustain and provide for? I shall 
allow the disbelievers little delight, and then force them to the 
torment of the Fire, and what an evil destination.”"! Ibn 
‘Abbas then recited, 


Tat iy 7 \iplie aS “lke ¢ 
<€On each these as well as a We bestow from the bounties of 
your Lord. And the bounties of your Lord can never be 
forbidden} (17:20). 


This was recorded by Ibn Marduwyah, who also recorded 
similar statements from Tkrimah and Mujahid. Similarly, Allah 
said, 

pee rr Seen a ah fe See Sai op 


32 


24 
fe Sy is Sagi CON As 3 


wee 7 AB SS 


a4 veer uo i Sis Pagel) xv) «> 


<Verily, those who invent a lie against Allah will never be 
successful. (A brief) enjoyment in this world! And then unto 
Us will be their return, then We shall make them taste the 
severest torment because they used to seas (10:69-70), 


oh te ATE G ES hs GO ae SE 

4 pe ue fj ee @ Seo peas fe) pit 
And whoever disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you (O 
Muhammad #3). To Us is their return, and We shall inform 
them what they have done. Verily, Allah is the Knower of what 
is in the breasts (of men). We let them enjoy for a little while, 
then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great 
torment. (31:23-24) and, 


(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:377. 


Sarah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1 385 


is ot AL at) Sh ES GN Sng SN Lt OS J SGD 
She oh 55 OSE CE Os GT eb mer Se Oks 
¢And were it not that mankind would have become of one 
conmnunity (all disbelievers desiring worldly life only), We 
would have provided for those who disbelieve in the Most 
Gracious (Allah), silver roofs for their houses, and elevators 
whereby they ascend. And for their houses, doors (of silver), 
and thrones (of silver) on which they could recline. And 
adornments of gold. Yet all this would have been nothing but 
an enjoyment of this world. And the Hereafter with your Lord 
is (only) for the Muttagin (the pious) .> (43:33-35). 

Allah said next, 


it 5 HK gute Sy thes Bp 


<Then I shall compel him to the torment of the Fire, and worst 
indeed is that destination!> 


meaning, “After the delight that the disbeliever enjoyed in this 
life, I will make his destination torment in the Fire, and what 
an evil destination.” This Ayah indicates that Allah gives the 
disbelievers respite and then seizes them in a manner 
compatible to His greatness and ability. This Ayah is similar to 
Allah’s statement, 


2 alt Sy FHS nb cay ST 0 og cep 
¢And many a township did I give respite while it was given to 
wrongdoing. Then (in the end) I seized it (with punishment). 
And to Me is the (final) return (of all)} (22:48). 

Also, the Two Sahihs recorded, 
wegiley 5s 55 Wy To kiss ah at Ge ae cil ye Gol ch 
«No one is more patient than Allah when hearing abuse. They 


attribute a son to Him, while He grants them sustenance and 
health 0!) 


The Sahih also recorded, 


(1 Fath Al-Bari 13:372, and Muslim 4:2160. 


386 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


‘Allah gives respite to the unjust person, until when He seizes 
him ; He never lets go of him .s!}! 


He then recited Allah’s statement, 
ges 2 4 4otg ss fie PBY 274 we Aer MOK 4% 
Conse SH AS Gy ab 5 ell SEN Ty aS AT 245s» 


<Such is the punishment of your Lord when He punishes the 
(population of) towns while they are doing wrong. Verily, His 
punishment is painful (and) severe>. (11:102) 


Building the Ka‘bah and asking Allah to accept This 
Deed 


Allah said, 


a 
ann SW 4 te TR OH TE ER ee 2 eye Leta ee ie a 8 ore 
AML elt cat GUL Uy SS Says CTT Se Seleall Zens OF 545d 
= 
were ode 


Jip ay te SR OG a ut al as og bs 
(Hi Lap 


€And (remember) when Ibrahim (Abraham) and (his son) 
Isma‘il (Ishmael) were raising the foundations of the House (the 
Ka‘bah at Makkah), (saying), “Our Lord! Accept (this service) 
from us. Verily, You are the Hearer, the Knower. Our Lord! 
And make us submissive unto You and of our offspring a 
nation submissive unto You, and show us our Mandasik and 
accept our repentance. Truly, You are the One Who accepts 
repentance, the Most Merciful .’’> 


Allah said, “O Muhammad! Remind your people when 
Ibrahim and Ismail built the House and raised its foundations 
while saying, 

Coli Ga 
<Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You are the 
Hearer, the Knower.’’> 


Al-Qurtubi mentioned that Ubayy and Ibn Mas‘id used to 
recite the Ayah this way, 


0] Fath ALBari 8 :205. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) _ 387 


hell Eh Bh BS oN by Lacs oot & eit teas OF Ss 

asi 
¢And (remember) when Ibrahim and (his son) Isma‘il were 
raising the foundations of the House (the Ka‘bah at Makkah), 
Saying, ‘Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You 
are the Hearer, the Knower.’’>!"! 


What further testifies to this statement (which adds ‘saying’ 
to the Ayah) by Ubayy and Ibn Mas‘dd, is what came 
afterwards, 


“5 fe ok EA Tete oR ee od yi irete ise 
a 2 NG) 5 at ps thet bp 
<Our Lord! And make us submissive unto You and of our 
offspring a nation submissive unto Youp. 


The Prophets Ibrahim and Isma‘l were performing a good 
deed, yet they asked Allah to accept this good deed from them. 
Ibn Abi Hatim narrated that Wuhayb bin Al-Ward recited, 


4 FES Sets CHS Sel Jeary OF So} 
4And (remember) when Ibrahim and (his son) Isma‘il were 
raising the foundations of the House (the Ka‘bah at Makkah), 
(saying), “Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us’’> 
and cried and said, “O Khalil of Ar-Rahmadn! You raise the 
foundations of the House of Ar-Rahman (Allah), yet you are 
afraid that He will not accept it from you?”?! This is the 


behavior of the sincere believers, whom Allah described in His 
statement, 


dis © BB Sal> 
¢And those who give that which they give» (23:60) 


meaning, they give away voluntary charity, and perform the 
acts of worship yet, 


ins esi} 
with their hearts full of fear> (23:60) 
(11 al-Ourtubi 2:126. 
(21 thn Abi Hatim 1:384. 


388 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


afraid that these good deeds might not be accepted of them. 
There is an authentic Hadith narrated by ‘A’ishah on this 
subject, which we will mention later, Allah willing. 

Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Prophet Ibrahim 
took Isma_l and his mother and went away with them until he 
reached the area of the House, where he left them next to a 
tree above Zamzam in the upper area of the Masjid. During 
that time, Isma‘l’s mother was still nursing him. Makkah was 
then uninhabited, and there was no water source in it. 
Ibrahim left them there with a bag containing some dates and 
a water-skin containing water. Ibrahim then started to leave, 
and Ismdail’s mother followed him and said, ‘O Ibrahim! To 
whom are you leaving us in this barren valley that is not 
inhabited?’ She repeated the question several times and 
Ibrahim did not reply. She asked, ‘Has Allah commanded you 
to do this?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ She said, I am satisfied that Allah 
will never abandon us.’ Ibrahim left, and when he was far 
enough away where they could not see him, close to 
Thaniyyah, he faced the House, raised his hands and 
supplicated, 

CoN Be ee 65 2 He hy GS oe EKA Sy Ep 
<O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring to dwell in an 
uncultivable valley by Your Sacred House (the Ka‘bah at 
Makkali)> until, 


4nd 


<Give thanks} (14:37). 


Ismail’s mother then returned to her place, started drinking 
water from the water-skin and nursing Isma‘l. When the 
water was used up, she and her son became thirsty. She 
looked at him, and he was suffering from thirst; she left, 
because she disliked seeing his face in that condition. She 
found the nearest mountian to where she was, As-Safa, 
ascended it and looked, in vain, hoping to see somebody. 
When she came down to the valley, she raised her garment 
and ran, just as a tired person runs, until she reached the Al- 
Marwah mountain. In vain, she looked to see if there was 
someone there. She ran to and fro (between the two 
mountains) seven times.” Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Messenger 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1 389 


of Allah # said, “This is why the people make the trip between 
As-Safa and Al-Marwah (during Hajj and Umrah).” 

“When she reached Al-Marwah, she heard a voice and said, 
‘Shush,’ to herself. She tried to hear the voice again and when 
she did, she said, I have heard you. Do you have relief?’ She 
found the angel digging with his heel (or his wing) where 
Zamzam now exists, and the water gushed out. Isma'‘ll’s 
mother was astonished and started digging, using her hand to 
transfer water to the water-skin.” Ibn ‘Abbas said that the 
Prophet # then said, “May Allah grant His mercy to the mother 
of Isma‘l, had she left the water, (flow naturally without her 
intervention), it would have been flowing on the surface of the 
earth.” 

“Ismail’s mother started drinking the water and her milk 
increased for her child. The angel (Gabriel) said to her, ‘Do not 
fear abandonment. There shall be a House for Allah built here 
by this boy and his father. Allah does not abandon His 
people.’ During that time, the area of the House was raised 
above ground level and the floods used to reach its right and 
left sides. 

Afterwards some people of the tribe of Jurhum, passing 
through Kada’, made camp at the bottom of the valley. They 
saw some birds, they were astonished, and said, ‘Birds can 
only be found at a place where there is water. We did not 
notice before that this valley had water.’ They sent a scout or 
two who searched the area, found the water, and returned to 
inform them about it. Then they all went to Isma‘l’s mother, 
next to the water, and said, ‘O Mother of Ismail! Will you 
allow us to be with you (or dwell with you)?’ She said, ‘Yes. 
But you will have no exclusive right to the water here.’ They 
said, ‘We agree.’” Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Prophet 3% said, “At 
that time, Isma‘l’s mother liked to have human company.” 

“And thus they stayed there and sent for their relatives to 
join them. Later on, her boy reached the age of puberty and 
married a lady from them, for Ismail learned Arabic from 
them, and they liked the way he was raised. Isma‘ll’s mother 
died after that. 

Then an idea occurred to Abraham to visit his dependents. 
So he left (to Makkah). When he arrived, he did not find 
Ismail, so he asked his wife about him. She said, ‘He has 


390 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


gone out hunting.’ When he asked her about their living 
conditions, she complained to him that they live in misery and 
poverty. Abraham said (to her), ‘When your husband comes, 
convey my greeting and tell him to change the threshold of his 
gate.’ When Isma‘il came, he sensed that they had a visitor 
and asked his wife, ‘Did we have a visitor?’ She said, ‘Yes. An 
old man came to visit us and asked me about you, and I told 
him where you were. He also asked about our condition, and I 
told him that we live in hardship and poverty.’ Ismail said, 
‘Did he ask you to do anything?’ She said, ‘Yes. He asked me 
to convey his greeting and that you should change the 
threshold of your gate.’ Ismail said to her, ‘He was my father 
and you are the threshold, so go to your family (i.e. you are 
divorced).’ So he divorced her and married another woman. 


Again Ibrahim thought of visiting his dependents whom he 
had left (at Makkah). Ibrahim came to Ismail’s house, but did 
not find Ismail and asked his wife, ‘Where is Isma‘l?’ Isma‘ll’s 
wife replied, ‘He has gone out hunting.’ He asked her about 
their condition, and she said that they have a good life and 
praised Allah. Ibrahim asked, ‘What is your food and what is 
your drink?’ She replied, ‘Our food is meat and our drink is 
water.’ He said, ‘O Allah! Bless their meat and their drink.’” 
The Prophet (Muhammad 3) said, “They did not have crops 
then, otherwise Ibrahim would have invoked Allah to bless that 
too. Those who do not live in Makkah cannot bear eating a diet 
only containing meat and water.” 


“Ibrahim said, ‘When Isma‘l comes back, convey my greeting 
to him and ask him to keep the threshold of his gate.’ When 
Isma‘ll came back, he asked, ‘Has anyone visited us.’ She said, 
‘Yes. A good looking old man,’ and she praised Ibrahim, ‘And 
he asked me about our livelihood and I told him that we live 
in good conditions.’ He asked, ‘Did he ask you to convey any 
message?’ She said, ‘Yes. He conveyed his greeting to you and 
said that you should keep the threshold of your gate.’ Ismail 
said, ‘That was my father, and you are the threshold; he 
commanded me to keep you.’ 


Ibrahim then came back visiting and found Isma‘l behind 
the Zamzam well, next to a tree, mending his arrows. When he 
saw Ibrahim, he stood up and they greeted each other, just as 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagaraht (125 - 149) (Part-1 391 


the father and son greet each other. Ibrahim said, ‘O Isma'll, 
Your Lord has ordered me to do something.’ He said, ‘Obey 
your Lord.’ He asked Ismail, ‘Will you help me?’ He said, ‘Yes, 
I will help you.’ Ibrahim said, ‘Allah has commanded me to 
build a house for Him there,’ and he pointed to an area that 
was above ground level. So, both of them rose and started to 
raise the foundations of the House. Abraham started building 
(the Ka‘bah), while Ismail continued handing him the stones. 
Both of them were saying, ‘O our Lord ! Accept (this service) 
from us, Verily, You are the Hearing, the Knowing.’ 
(2.127).’"'! Hence, they were building the House, part by part, 
going around it and saying, 


¢Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Verily, You are the 
Hearer, the Knower.> 


The Story of rebuilding the House by Quraysh before the 
Messenger of Allah # was sent as Prophet 


In his Sirah, Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar said, “When 
the Messenger of Allah 3 reached thirty-five years of age, the 
Quraysh gathered to rebuild the Ka‘bah, this included covering 
it with a roof. However, they were weary of demolishing it. 
During that time, the Ka‘bah was barely above a man’s 
shoulder, so they wanted to raise its height and build a ceiling 
on top. Some people had stolen the Ka‘bah’s treasure 
beforehand, which used to be in a well in the middle of the 
Ka‘bah. The treasure was later found with a man called, 
Duwayk, a freed servant of Bani Mulayh bin ‘Amr, from the 
tribe of Khuza‘ah. The Quraysh cut off his hand as 
punishment. Some people claimed that those who actually stole 
the treasure left it with Duwayk. Afterwards, the sea brought a 
ship that belonged to a Roman merchant to the shores of 
Jeddah, where it washed-up. So they collected the ship’s wood 
to use it for the Ka‘bah’s ceiling; a Coptic carpenter in Makkah 
prepared what they needed for the job. 

When they decided to begin the demolition process to rebuild 


"1 Fath Al-Bari 6:456. 


392 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


the House, Abu Wahb bin ‘Amr bin ‘A’idh bin ‘Abd bin Imran 
bin Makhzim took a stone from the Ka‘bah; the stone slipped 
from his hand and went back to where it had been. He said, 
‘O people of Quraysh! Do not spend on rebuilding the House, 
except from what was earned from pure sources. No money 
earned from a prostitute, usury or injustice should be 
included.’” Ibn Ishaq commented here that the people also 
attribute these words to Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah bin 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin Makhzam.!"! 

Ibn Ishaq continued, “The Quraysh began to organize their 
efforts to rebuild the Ka‘bah, each subtribe taking the 
responsibility of rebuilding a designated part of it. 

However, they were still weary about bringing down the 
Ka'bah. Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah said, 1 will start to bring it 
down.’ He held an ax and stood by the Ka‘bah and said, ‘O 
Allah! No harm is meant. O Allah! We only seek to do a good 
service.’ He then started to chop the House’s stones. The 
people waited that night and said, ‘We will wait and see. If 
something strikes him, we will not bring it down and instead 
rebuid it the way it was. If nothing happens to him, then Allah 
will have agreed to what we are doing.’ The next morning, Al- 
Walid went to work on the Ka‘bah, and the people started 
bringing the Ka‘bah down with him. When they reached the 
foundations that Ibrahim built, they uncovered green stones 
that were above each other, just like a pile of spears.” Ibn 
Ishaq then said that some people told him, “A man from 
Quraysh, who was helping rebuild the Ka‘bah, placed the 
shovel between two of these stones to pull them up; when one 
of the stones was moved, all of Makkah shook, so they did not 
dig up these stones.”! 


The Dispute regarding Who should place the Black 
Stone in Its Place 


Ibn Ishaq said, “The tribes of Quraysh collected stones to 
rebuild the House, each tribe collecting on their own. They 
started rebuilding it, until the rebuilding of the Ka‘bah 
reached the point where the Black Stone was to be placed in 


(1) Tbn Hisham 1:204. 
(2) fbn Hisham 1:207. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1 393 


its designated site. A dispute erupted between the various 
tribes of Quraysh, each seeking the honor of placing the Black 
Stone for their own tribe. The dispute almost led to violence 
between the leaders of Quraysh in the area of the Sacred 
House. Banu ‘Abd Ad-Dar and Banu ‘Adi bin Ka‘b bin Lu’ay, 
gave their mutual pledge to fight until death. However, five or 
four days later, Abu Umayyah bin Al-Mughirah bin ‘Abdullah 
bin ‘Amr bin Makhzim, the oldest man from Quraysh then 
intervened at the right moment. Abu Umayyah suggested that 
Quraysh should appoint the first man to enter the House from 
its entrance to be a mediator between them. They agreed. 

The Messenger - Muhammad #& - was the first person to 
enter the House. When the various leaders of Quraysh realized 
who the first one was, they all proclaimed, This is AlLAmin (the 
Honest one}. We all accept him; This is Muhammad.’ When the 
Prophet #% reached the area where the leaders were gathering 
and they informed him about their dispute, he asked them to 
bring a garment and place it on the ground. He placed the 
Black Stone on it. He then requested that each of the leaders of 
Quraysh hold the garment from one side and all participate in 
lifting the Black Stone, moving it to its designated area. Next, 
the Prophet # carried the Black Stone by himself and placed it 
in its designated position and built around it. The Quraysh 
used to call the Messenger of Allah ‘Al-Amin’ even before the 
revelation came to him.” 


Ibn Az-Zubayr rebuilds Al-Ka ‘bah the way the Prophet + 
wished 


Ibn Ishaq said, “During the time of the Prophet #, the 
Ka‘bah was eighteen cubits high and was covered with 
Egyptian linen, and they with a striped garment. Al-Hajjaj bin 
Yusuf was the first person to cover it with silk.”"! The Ka‘bah 
remained the same way the Quraysh rebuilt it, until it was 
burned during the reign of ‘Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr, after the 
year 60 H, at the end of the reign of Yazid bin Mu‘awiyah. 
During that time, Ibn Az-Zubayr was besieged at Makkah. 
When it was burned, Ibn Az-Zubayr brought the Ka‘bah down 
and built it upon the foundations of Ibrahim, including the Hijr 


(1) Ibn Hisham 1:211. 


394 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


in it. He also made an eastern door and a western door in the 
Ka‘bah and placed them on ground level. He had heard his 
aunt ‘A’iishah, the Mother of the believers, narrate that the 
Messenger of Allah #% had wished that. The Ka‘bah remained 
like this throughout his reign, until Al-Hajjaj killed Ibn Az- 
Zubayr and then rebuilt it the way it was before, by the order of 
‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan. 

Muslim recorded that ‘Ata’ said, “The House was burnt 
during the reign of Yazid bin Mu‘awiyah, when the people of 
Ash-Sham raided Makkah. Ibn Az-Zubayr did not touch the 
House until the people came for Hajj, for he wanted to incite 
them against the people of Ash-Sham. He said to them, ‘O 
people! Advise me regarding the Ka‘bah, should we bring it 
down and rebuild it, or just repair the damage it sustained?’ 
Ibn ‘Abbas said, I have an opinion about this. You should 
rebuild the House the way it was when the people became 
Muslims. You should leave the stones that existed when the 
people became Muslims and when the Prophet 3% was sent.’ 
Ibn Az-Zubayr said, ‘If the house of one of them gets burned, 
he will not be satisfied, until he rebuilds it. How about Allah’s 
House? I will invoke my Lord for three days and will then 
implement what I decide.’ When the three days had passed, he 
decided to bring the Ka‘bah down. The people hesitated to 
bring it down, fearing that the first person to climb on the 
House would be struck down. A man went on top of the House 
and threw some stones down, and when the people saw that no 
harm touched him, they started doing the same. They brought 
the House down to ground level. Ibn Az-Zubayr surrounded the 
site with curtains hanging from pillars, so that the House 
would be covered, until the building was erect. Ibn Az-Zubayr 
then said, 1 heard ‘A’ishah say that the Messenger of Allah 3% 
said, 

BG Me abd U BEN Se gale G5 HR lye Das 5 Of gh 
GG) Se Cot Jes Gy S Shaaly age All Ge ag Chal 285 
«lf it was not for the fact that the people have recently 


abandoned disbelief, and that I do not have enough money to 
spend on it, I would have included in the House five cubits 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 395 


from Al-Hijr and would have made a door for it that people 
could enter from, and another door that they could exit from.» 


Ibn Az-Zubayr said, I can spend on this job, and I do not 
fear the people.’ So he added five cubits from the Hijr, which 
looked like a rear part for the House that people could clearly 
see. He then built the House and made it eighteen cubits high. 
He thought that the House was still short and added ten 
cubits in the front and built two doors in it, one as an 
entrance and another as an exit. 

When Ibn Az-Zubayr was killed, Al-Hajjaj wrote to ‘Abdul- 
Malik bin Marwan asking him about the House and told him 
that Ibn Az-Zubayr made a rear section for the House. ‘Abdul- 
Malik wrote back, ‘We do not agree with Ibn Az-Zubayr’s 
actions. As, for the Ka‘bah’s height, leave it as it is. As for 
what he added from the Hijr, bring it down, and build the 
House as it was before and close the door.’ Therefore, Al-Hajjaj 
brought down the House and rebuilt it as it was.” In his 
Sunan, An-Nasai collected the Hadith of the Prophet 2% 
narrated from ‘A’ishah, not the whole story, |! 

The correct Sunnah conformed to Ibn Az-Zubayr’s actions, 
because this was what the Prophet 3% wished he could do, but 
feared that the hearts of the people who recently became 
Muslim could not bear rebuilding the House. This Sunnah was 
not clear to ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan. Hence, when ‘Abdul- 
Malik realized that ‘A’ishah had narrated the Hadith of the 
Messenger of Allah #% on this subject, he said, “I wish we had 
left it as Ibn Az-Zubayr had made it.” Muslim recorded that 
Ubadydullah bin ‘Ubayd said that Al-Harith bin ‘Abdullah 
came to ‘Abdul-Malik bin Marwan during his reign. ‘Abdul- 
Malik said, I did not think that Abu Khubayb (Ibn Az-Zubayr) 
heard from ‘A’ishah what he said he heard from her.’ Al-Harith 
said, ‘Yes he did. I heard the Hadith from her.’ ‘Abdul-MAalik 
said, ‘You heard her say what?’ He said, ‘She said that the 
Messenger of Allah # said, 


185 G Shei Sy peage Ss V5 oct ot fy ae op 
0 185 GY AUG O85 Of gad Se apd Ub Op 


(1) Muslim 2:970. 
(2) an-Nasai 5:218. 


396 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


«Your people rebuilt the House smaller. Had it not been for the 

fact that your people are not far from the time of Shirk, I would 
add what was left outside of it. If your people afterwards think 
about rebuilding it, let me show you what they left out of it.» 
He showed her around seven cubits.’ 


One of the narrators of the Hadith, Al-Walid bin ‘Ata’, added 
that the Prophet 3% said, 
O68 Sao 63 6038s GE ei gb gt oy ou WB Shel 
Assist ye Vy Gas ¥ Sf a OU OY 2B cid egy 15 ws 
yas Jods Of ey Ss ais Sey Yea Sf siz 58 1B) Jess SS 


. 


thick 


«I would have made two doors for the House on ground level, 
one eastern and one western. Do you know why your people 
raised its door above ground level?» She said, ‘No.’ He said, 
"To allow only those whom they wanted to enter it. When a 
man whom they did not wish to enter the House climbed to the 
level of the door, they would push him down» 


‘Abdul-Malik then said, ‘You heard ‘A’ishah say this Hadith?’ 
He said, ‘Yes.’ ‘Abdul-Malik said, 1 wish | left it as it was.”!!! 
An Ethiopian will destroy the Ka‘bah just before the 
Last Hour 


The Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Hurayrah said that the 
Messenger of Allah x said, 


i H rend 2 seme ste 
CLES Se EBSA 93 NN LIA 


‘The Ka‘bah will be destroyed by Dhus-Sawigatayn (literally, a 
person with two lean legs) from Ethiopia .»'?1 


Also, Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Prophet 3 said, 
AS Wes WE ast sel, Jes 
‘As if I see him now: a black person with thin legs plucking 
the stones of the Ka‘bah one after another.» Al-Bukhari 
(1 Muslim 2:971. 
21 Fath AL-Bari 3:538, and Muslim 4:2232. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 397 
recorded this Hadith!" 
Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal recorded in his Musnad that 


‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin Al-‘As said that he heard the 
Messenger of Allah say, 


WEIS be WAL le Why th Sy ypU 5b Gh Shp 
tapie) Olt, Ue S25 al 5 url th LT JW; 
‘Dhus-Sawigatayn from Ethiopia will destroy the Ka'bah and 
will loot its adornments and cover. It is as if I see him now: 
bald, with thin legs striking the Ka‘bah with his ax .»!?! 
This will occur after the appearance of Gog and Magog 


people. Al-Bukhari recorded that Abu Said Al-Khudri said that 
the Messenger of Allah 2% said, 


‘There will be Hajj and ‘Umrah to the House after the 
appearance of Gog and Magog people .»!*! 


Al-Khalil’s Supplication | 
Allah said that Ibrahim and Isma‘l supplicated to Him, 


oo 
wo ne 


4H Le5I Chal 
sOur Lord! And make us submissive unto You and of our 
offspring a nation submissive unto You, and show us our 


Manasik, and accept our repentance. Truly, You are the One 

Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful .> 

Ibn Jarir said, “They meant by their supplication, Make us 
submit to Your command and obedience and not associate 


anyone with You in obedience or worship.”*! Also, Tkrimah 
commented on the Ayah, 


456 sige teh 
€Our Lord! And make us submissive unto You> 
0) Fath Al-Bari 3 :538. 
(2) Ahmad 2:220. 
3] Fath AL-Bari 3:531. 
(4) At-Tabari 3:73. 


398 = Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
“Allah said, ‘I shall do that.’” 


48 dA LD 


¢And of our offspring a nation submissive unto Youp 
Allah said, 1 shall do that.” 
This supplication by Ibrahim and Isma‘l is similar to what 
Allah informed us of about His believing servants, 

45000, 
€And those who say: ‘Our Lord! Bestow on us from our wives 
and our offspring the comfort of our eyes, and make us leaders 
of the Muttagin> (25:74). 


This type of supplication is allowed, because loving to have 
offspring who worship Allah alone without partners is a sign of 
complete love of Allah. This is why when Allah said to Ibrahim, 


Key 8 Ge > 
<Verily, I am going to make you an Imam (a leader) for 
mankind (to follow you)> Ibrahim said, 
inet cage IG IG BS 05> 
<“And of my offspring (to make leaders). (Allah) said, ‘My 
covenant (prophethood) includes not the Zalimin (polytheists 
and wrongdoers)’"> which is explained by, 
GEA LS J gs gutsy 
€And keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols> 


Muslim narrated in his Sahih that Abu Hurayrah said that 
the Messenger of Allah 3% said, 


5 shay GE ple Hee Bie caot ty Vy die ahi pai fn Su ip 
«When the son of Adam dies, his deeds end except for three 


deeds: an ongoing charity, a knowledge that is being benefited 
from and a righteous son who supplicates (to Allah) for him .0!"| 


[1 Muslim 3:1255. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1 399 


The Meaning of Mandsik 


Said bin Mansur said that ‘Attab bin Bashir informed us 
from Khasif, from Mujahid who said, “The Prophet: Ibrahim 
supplicated, 


dK Ud 
¢and show us our Mandsik> 


Jibril then came down, took him to the House and said, ‘Raise 
its foundations.’ Ibrahim raised the House’s foundations and 
completed the building. Jibril held Ibrahim’s hand, led him to 
As-Safa and said, This is among the rituals of Allah.’ He then 
took him to Al-Marwah and said, ‘And this is among the 
rituals of Allah.’ He then took him to Mina until when they 
reached the ‘Aqabah, they found Iblis standing next to a tree. 
Jibril said, ‘Say Takbir (Allah is the Great) and throw (pebbles) 
at him.’ Ibrahim said the Takbir and threw (pebbles at) Iblis. 
Iblis moved to the middle Jamrah, and when Jibril and 
Ibrahim passed by him, Jibril said to Ibrahim, ‘Say Takbir and 
throw at him.’ Ibrahim threw at him and said Takbir. The 
devious Iblis sought to add some evil acts to the rituals of 
Hajj, but he was unable to succeed. Jibril took Ibrahim’s hand 
and led him to Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram and ‘Arafat and said to 
him, ‘Have you ‘Arafta (known, learned) what I showed you?’ 
thrice. Ibrahim said, ‘Yes I did.’”'! Similar statements were 
reported from Abu Mijlaz and Qatadah.|?! 
Cow 25d Gell EA ah 


€129. “Our Lord! Send amongst them a Messenger of their 
own, who shall recite unto them Your verses and instruct them 
in the Book (this Qur'an), and purify them. Verily, You are the 
Mighty, the Wise.”’> 


Ibrahim’s Supplication that Allah sends the Prophet # 


Allah mentioned Ibrahim’s supplication for the benefit of the 
people of the Sacred Area (to grant them security and 


"1 Said Bin Mansar 2:615. 
(2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :387. 


400 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


provision), and it was perfected by invoking Allah to send a 
Messenger from his offspring. This accepted supplication, from 
Ibrahim, conformed with Allah’s appointed destiny that 
Muhammad 38 be sent as a Messenger among the Ummiyyin 
and to all non- Arabs. among the Jinns and mankind. 

Hence, Ibrahim was the first person to mention the Prophet 
#4 to the people. Ever since, Muhammad 3% was known to the 
people, until the last Prophet was sent among the Children of 
Israel, Jesus the son of Mary, who mentioned Muhammad 3 
by name. Jesus addressed the Children of Israel saying, 


Cl oh ot be oh wa Ge at Be tS op 
<I am the Messenger of Allah unto you, confirming what is 
before me in the Tawrdh, and giving glad tidings of a 
Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad> 
(61:6) 

This is why the Prophet # said , 
A Me SOLD pat gl beet 
«The supplication of my father le and the glad tidings 
brought forth by Jesus the son of Mary.»!1! 
The Prophet # said, 


a, pt 37 Oe a ee ee St Sy ra 
to js a) etal oy est al ws! ly yD 


tMy mother saw a ug that went out of her and radiated the 
palaces of Ash-Sham. 


It was said that the Prophet’s mother saw this vision when 
she was pregnant with, narrated this vision to her people, and 
the story became popular among them. The light mentioned in 
the Hadith appeared in Ash-Sham (Greater Syria), testifying to 
what will later occur when the Prophet’s religion will be firmly 
established in Ash-Sham area. This is why by the end of time, 
Ash-Sham will be a refuge for Islam and its people. Also, 
Jesus the son of Mary will descend in Ash-Sham, next to the 
eastern white minaret in Damascus. The Two Sahihs stated, 


reste B55 HE fo Bh V Si Se a tb Gol y, Bb iS Wo 


"11 As-Sahthah nos.1546 and 1925. 
(2) Ahmad 5 :262. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1 
PLES AA5) Sota cemee hy AS B45 aa JA ah & 
‘There will always be a group of my Ummah who will be on 


the truth, undeterred by those who fail or oppose them, until 
the command of Allah comes while they are on this.» 


Al-Bukhari added in his Sahih, «And they will reside in Ash- 
Sham oo! 
The Meaning of Al-Kitab wal-Hikmah 
Allah said, 
ecsssi yh > 


and instruct them in the Book> meaning, Al-Qur’an, 


¢and Al-Hikmah> meaning, the Sunnah, as Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 
Mugatil bin Hayyan and Abu Malik asserted.'?) It was also said 
that ‘Al-Hikmah’, means ‘comprehension in the religion’, and 
both meanings are correct. ‘Ali bin Abi Talhah said, that Ibn 
‘Abbas said that, 


q S55 
¢and purify them means, “With the obedience of Allah.”!*! 
Sil pai ch ty 
<Verily, You are the Mighty, the Wise>. 


This Ayah stated that Allah is able to do anything, and 
nothing escapes His ability. He is Wise in His decisions, His 
actions, and He puts everything in its rightful place due to His 
perfect knowledge, wisdom and justice. 


iM 4 5 Uhl g eet as oy co, Ge 4 id 
eraad Aly I 5 Se Gal KS glesl it Sy Gs Satis 2 
€130. And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim (i.e. 


(1) Fath Al-Bari 6:731 and Muslim 2:1524. 
[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:390. 
{3} Ibn Abi Hatim 1:391. 


402 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Islamic Monotheism) except him who fools himself? Truly, We 
chose him in this world and verily, in the Hereafter he will be 
among the righteous>. 


€131. When his Lord said to him, “Submit (i.e. be a 
Muslim)!’ He said, “I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to 
the Lord of the ‘Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists) .”’> 
4132. And this (submission to Allah, Islam) was enjoined by 
Ibrahim (Abraham) upon his sons and by Ya‘qub (Jacob) 
(saying), ““O my sons! Allah has chosen for you the (true) 
religion, then die not except as Muslims." 


Only the Fools deviate from Ibrahim’s Religion 


Allah refuted the disbelievers’ innovations of associating 
others with Allah in defiance of the religion of Ibrahim, the 
leader of the upright. Ibrahim always singled out Allah in 
worship, with sincerity, and he did not call upon others 
besides Allah. He did not commit Shirk, even for an instant. 
He disowned every other deity that was being worshipped 
instead of Allah and defied all his people in this regard. 
Prophet Ibrahim said, 


MG GH HS shy oats LES Sy MOE Ge tees Gy SD 
CWE , Ht hs 
€O my people! I am indeed free from all that you join as 
partners (in worship with Allah). Verily, I have turned my face 
towards Him Who has created the heavens and the earth Hanifa 
(Islamic Monotheism), and I am not of Al-Mushrikin .> (6:78- 
79). Also, Allah said, 
AB oi cA WY aks GT Sl ass aN Aa JE yp 
tone 
<And (remember) when Ibrahim said to his father and his 
people: “Verily, | am innocent of what you worship. “Except 
Hitn (i.e. I worship none but Allah alone) Who did create me; 
and verily, He will guide me’’> (43:26-27), 


AS 3 SG CB gy ey et A GN cot HT OE 


3 <4 a t, be to w 
qne te OY tah, Ya VG 3 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 403 


¢And Ibrahim's invoking (of Allah) for his father’s forgiveness 
was only because of a promise he (Ibrahim) had made to him 
(his father). But when it became clear to him (Ibrahim) that he 
(his father) was an enemy of Allah, he dissociated himself from 
him. Verily, Ibrahim was Awwah (one who invokes Allah with 
humility, glorifies Him and remembers Him much) and was 
forbearing> (9:114), and, 
1G LAY Yeo WSOCE & AS hs a Ub Oe soi Ub 
dow Sekt SS eT g BG ES EN 9 2S oe A pee Sy sy 


<Verily, Ibrahim was an Ummah (a leader having all the good 
qualities, or a nation), obedient to Allah, Hanif (i.e. to worship 
none but Allah), and he was not one of those who were Al- 
Mushrikin. (He was) thankful for His (Allah's) favors. He 
(Allah) chose him (as an intimate friend) and guided him to a 
straight path. And We gave him good in this world, and in the 
Hereafter he shall be of the righteous.» (16:120-122). 


This is why Allah said here, 
dios BF 245 id 
¢And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim>, meaning, 
abandons his path, way and method 


re 4 
4455 se Vp 


<except him who fools himself? meaning, who commits injustice 
against himself by deviating from the truth, to wickedness. 
Such a person will be defying the path of he who was chosen in 
this life to be a true Imam, from the time he was young, until 
Allah chose him to be His Khalil, and who shall be among the 
successful in the Last Life. Is there anything more insane than 
deviating from this path and following the path of misguidance 
and deviation instead? Is there more injustice than this? Allah 
said, 


<r se bi at xy 
<Verily, joining others in worship with Allah is a great Zulm 
(wrong) indeed} (31:13). 
Abu Al-‘Aliyah and Qatadah said, “This Ayah (2:130) was 
revealed about the Jews who invented a practice that did not 


404 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


come from Allah and that defied the religion of Ibrahim.”!"! 
Allah’s statement, 


Ly GEN & ES OS hs SE SS Ors SK tat OF > 

CSG by SG Mew Col 2 ss 2 Sali catty Et Dt 
<lbrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a true 
Muslim Hanifa (to worship none but Allah alone) and he was 
not of Al-Mushrikin. Verily, among mankind who have the best 
claim to Ibrahim are those who followed him, and this Prophet 
(Muhammad #3) and those who have believed (Muslims). And 
Allah is the Wali (Protector and Helper) of the believers.» 
(3:67-68), testifies to this fact. 


Allah said next, 
4imosnctsit oy LON 36 5 SE yp 


When his Lord said to him, “Submit (i.e. be a Muslim)!" He 
said, “I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the 
‘Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists).”’> 


This Ayah indicates that Allah commanded Ibrahim to be 
sincere with Him and to abide and submit to Him; Ibrahim 
perfectly adhered to Allah’s command. Allah’s statement, 


42555 a Loi & isd 

¢And this (submission to Allah, Islam) was enjoined by Ibrahim 

upon his sons and by Ya‘qub> 
means, Ibrahim commanded his offspring to follow this 
religion, that is, Islam, for Allah. Or, the Ayah might be 
referring to Ibrahim’s words, 

ibe 2) 227 \> 
41 have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the 
‘Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists)». 


This means that these Prophets loved these words so much that 
they preserved them until the time of death and advised their 
children to adhere to them after them. Similarly, Allah said, 


() Ibn Abi Hatim 1:392. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagaraht (125 - 149) Part-1 405 


¢And he (Ibrahim) made it i.e. La ilaha illallah (none has the 
right to be worshipped but Allah alone)] a Word lasting among 
his offspring, (true Monotheism)> (43:28). 


It might be that Ibrahim advised his children, including 
Jacob, Isaac’s son, who were present. It appears, and Allah 
knows best, that Isaac was endowed with Jacob, during the 
lifetime of Ibrahim and Sarah, for the good news includes both 
of them in Allah’s statement, 


$35 BT os Geek, GERS> 


<But We gave her (Sarah) glad tidings of Ishaq (Isaac), and 
after Ishaq, of Ya’qub (Jacob) (11:71). 
Also, if Jacob was not alive then, there would be no use 


here in mentioning him specifically among Isaac’s children. 
Also, Allah said in aie Al-‘Ankabut, 


45555 325 tS 33 a2 3 ties; REY ou } FA C55 


¢And We bestowed on him (Ibrahim), Ishaq and Ya‘qub, and 
We ordained among his offspring prophethood and the Book.> 
(29:27), and, 


C8 ofits sy CGD 

¢And We bestowed upon him Ishaq, and (a grandson) Ya‘qub> 
(21:72), thus, indicating that this occurred during Ibrahim’s 
lifetime. Also, Jacob built Bayt Al-Maqdis, as earlier books 
testified. The Two Sahihs recorded that Abu Dharr said, “I said, 
‘O Messenger of Allah! Which Masjid was built first?’ He said, 
tAl-Masjid Al-Haram (Al-Ka‘bah).» 1 said, Then?’ He said, «Bayt 
Al- Magqdis.» | said, ‘How many years later?’ He said, ‘Forty 
years.0"'l Further, the advice that Jacob gave to his children, 
which we will soon mention, testifies that Jacob was among 
those who received the advice mentioned in Aydt above (2:130- 
132). 


Adhering to Tawhid until Death 
Allah said, 
455 2 G5 GB Sal A Giesl it gs 
'') Fath Al-Bari 6:469, and Muslim 1 :370. 


406 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<(Saying), “O my sons! Allah has chosen for you the (true) 
religion, then die not except as Muslims .”’> 


meaning, perform righteous deeds during your lifetime and 
remain on this path, so that Allah will endow you with the 
favor of dying upon it. Usually, one dies upon the path that he 
lived on and is resurrected according to what he died on. 
Allah, the Most Generous, helps those who seek to do good 
deeds to remain on the righteous path. 

This by no means contradicts the authentic Hadith that 
says, 

Sed Gise SF EG My Ws OK ae al YT ss, Jaa J Op 

JON Jol Joe, Jad Jeg Gy Was tn get pce, Jd Sesh ole 

Bi fe Jas Sesh oe 55 pi eu Ma Sau S 


«Man might perform the works of the people of Paradise until 
only a span of outstretched arms or a cubit separates him from it, 
then the Book (destiny) takes precedence, and he performs the 
works of the people of the Fire and thus enters it. Also, man 
might perform the works of the people of the Fire until only a 
span of outstretched arms or a cubit separates him from the Fire, 
but the Book takes precedence and he performs the works of the 
people of Paradise and thus enters it.»!"] Allah said, (92:5-10), 


GOERS 525 cs Qe 15 Osh ss DH Ll s 
(Ov 15 Osis 
¢As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty to Allah 
and fears Him. And believes in Al-Husna. We will make 
smooth for him the path of ease (goodness). But he who is a 
greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient. And belies Al- 
Husna (none has the right to be worshipped except Allah). We 
will make smooth for him the path for evil>, 
LB UWE as AS Cad IE Soci OAs pas 4 Tah AS pip 
TA ahs ROSA A 25 es Wh GR Lets seni le yy ays 


0 Fath Al-Bari 6:105. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 407 
dnc gles OF te Sh GS oS ES oi ck 
€133. Or were you witnesses when death approached Ya‘qub 
(Jacob)? When he said unto his sons, ‘What will you worship 
after me?” They said, ‘We shall worship your Allah (God — 
Allah) the Ilah of your fathers, Ibrahim (Abraham), Isma‘il 


(Ishmael), Ishaq (Isaac), One Ilah, and to Him we submit (in 
Islam)>.” 


4134. That was a nation who has passed away. They shall 
receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you 
earn. And you will not be asked of what they used to do.> 


Ya‘qub’s Will and Testament to His Children upon His 
Death 


This Ayah contains Allah’s criticism of the Arab pagans 
among the offspring of Ismail as well as the disbelievers 
among the Children of Israel Jacob the son of Isaac, the son 
of Ibrahim. When death came to Jacob, he advised his 
children to worship Allah alone without partners. He said to 
them, 


Ce epee Bie poeuiew% woe ote et of tA 
RSENS Secs Kea Fybote ay AGS, LS UW as & GAS > 


€’What will you worship after me?” They said, ‘We shall 
worship your Ilah (God — Allah) the Ilah of your fathers, 
Ibrahim, Isma‘il, Ishaq,” > 


Mentioning Ismail here is a figure of speech, because Ismail 
is Jacob’s uncle. An-Nahas said that the Arabs call the uncle 
a father, as Al-Qurtubi mentioned>.!"! 

This Ayah is used as evidence that the grandfather is called 
a father and inherits, rather than the brothers (i.e. when his 
son dies), as Abu Bakr asserted, according to Al-Bukhari who 
narrated Abu Bakr’s statement from Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn Az- 
Zubayr. Al-Bukhdari then commented that there are no 
opposing opinions regarding this subject.'?/ This is also the 
opinion of ‘A’ishah the Mother of the believers, Al-Hasan Al- 
Basri, Tawis and ‘Ata’, Malik, Ash-Shafi and Ahmad said that 


(4) Al-Qurtubi 2:138. 
[2] Rath Al-Bari 12:19. 


408 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


the inheritance is divided between the grandfather and the 
brothers. It was reported that this was also the opinion of 
‘Umar, Uthman, ‘Ali, bin Mas‘id, Zayd bin Thabit and several 
scholars among the Salaf and later generations. 

The statement, 


4155 Gd 
¢One Ilah (God)> means, “We single Him out in divinity and do 
not associate anything or anyone with Him.” 
Kigkes db EBay 
¢And to Him we submit>, in obedience meaning, obedient and 
submissiveness. Similarly, Allah said, 
428, 545 WES GA LNG oGcat a 4 eT > 
4While to Him submitted all creatures in the heavens and the 


earth, willingly or unwillingly. And to Him shall they all be 
returned} (3:83). 


Indeed, Islam is the religion of all the Prophets, even if their 
rei]spective laws differed. Allah said, 

CALE HM GY woh eh YS oe so CI > 
¢And We did not send any Messenger before you (O 
Muhaminad 38) [but We revealed to him (saying): La ilaha illa 
Ana [none has the right to be worshipped but I (Allah)], so 
worship Me (alone and none else)> (21:25). 

There are many other Aydt - and Hadiths - on this subject. 
For instance, the Prophet # said, 
thely the Nt 3N3i si jie a 
‘We, the Prophets, are brothers with different mothers, but the 
same religion .»!") 
Allah said, 


6258 oe BA 


eld 35 Gl Gib > 


<That was a nation who has passed away meaning, existed before 
your time, 


I) Ahmad 2:319. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 409 
CAS GS ES uQip 


<They shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of 
what you earn>. 


This Ayah proclaims, Your relationship to the Prophets or 
righteous people among your ancestors will not benefit you, 
unless you perform good deeds that bring about you religious 
benefit. They have their deeds and you have yours, 


gr hed ae 


45505 ie Vos Yl > 
¢And you will not be asked of what they used to do>.” 
This is why a Hadith proclaims, 


‘Whoever was slowed on account of his deeds will not get any 
faster on account of his family lineage .»'") 


eG he son hk Es Ate LE ep 
tag Ei 
4135. And they say, “Be Jews or Christians, then you will be 
guided.” Say (to them O Muhammad 8), “‘Nay, (we follow) 
only the religion of Ibrahim, Hanif (Islamic Monotheism), and 
he was not of Al-Mushrikin (those who worshipped others along 
with Allah.> 
Muhammad bin Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that 
‘Abdullah bin Suriya Al-A‘war said to the Messenger of Allah, 
“The guidance is only what we (Jews) follow. Therefore, follow 
us, O Muhammad, and you will be rightly guided.” Also, the 
Christians said similarly, so Allah revealed, 
RUE cs7s Mage Se (55> 
€And they say, “Be Jews or Christians, then you will be 
guided.”’>'*) Allah’s statement, 


% tee oh 
qs soot LE D> 


(1 Muslim 4 :2074. 
21 thn Abi Hatim 1:397. 


Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 


v\ EDEN Say (to them O 
Muhammad 3), “Nay, 
(we follow) only the 


saline F 
A 720 ep 34 died - Po 2 whee 
pea b Deze SHG Als Zoi ses 


ad 


26 Leth h kee essere 41o ot oe 
nen a 8 OS LISS 0 glance |! religion of Ibrahim, 


va 
har 


bece ye yet etice. at Aie7ia 14. || Hanif> means, “We do 
wo ere Bye Oe v “6 Sai . sof} 3] ? ; 
RAIS baat Vs ley baldy not need the Judaism 
DANG NES cones or GIGGLES | or Christianity that 
i ep BORd Orhise c OR Co BG ce ene you call us to, rather, 
© Ophea F 9 4h dol Ot BOY 593504 
én 
HRT Sh “lee So tee yd face og 
LB Esaafy Ly eal ad any eral le aerate ls 


oe or 5s 4 te weit er How) onl the 
3 “52 Aes ot ta ~~ Can 3 €(we fo ry 
wASS oe Voy A reas = gly Se religion of Ibrahim, 
MI TEe. eee 3 


wots aes Hei ial Tip tson ry Hanify meaning, on 
od, Bee he ote Se er Biers th ger re the straight path, as 
pak assis teal Js © 034s* || Muhammad bin Ka‘b 


0% ame 98 007 edo oh Bee od wr eheene t Zo= us 
ABs A225 Ch CHG, || Al-Qurazi and ‘Isa bin 


I ae stated,!"! 
oF B5 GENS Sages Se9NEI5 | Also, Abu Qilabah 
iv gor eit, oh a eo So" Zee : “ a 
Bee aie F4de Bae AA --tjy- ||said, “The Hanif is 
RAAT SOY NT IN Aen 
Al glehetle Shes — Pr ~~~" ll what the Messengers, 
seer oe ’ Be 4 rl 6 Bi tere : « 

Bale ail Cad og BAG BOS ye AU 585 from beginning to 
serene, eb ae oc Bch pe gee Beets - || end, believed in.”!?! 

g ‘¢ =n Meal alls Gol; Bye yey , 
Sane, chy Of G Ay Cee BD 
om aia cl at Saas EN Eel BO Ol Co 2 ab) ¢ 
MOLEC BG; | acs 
Say sa DL dl Uy 
SH SEY 1 oe OA ON was ot oN 5 SONG Gots Sey 


be “t 
Ge fet a> 


€136. Say (O Muslims): “We believe in Allah and that which 
has been sent down to us and that which has been sent down to 
Ibrahim (Abraham), Isma‘il (Ishmael), Ishaq (Isaac), Ya‘qub 
(Jacob), and to Al-Asbat (the offspring of the twelve sons of 
Ya‘qub), and that which has been given to Miisé (Moses) and 
‘Isa (Jesus), and that which has been given to the Prophets from 
their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and to 
Him we have submitted (in Islam) ."> 


(1 Tbn Abi Hatim 1:397. 
[21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:397. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1 411 


The Muslim believes in all that Allah ‘revealed and all 
the Prophets 


Allah directed His believing servants to believe in what He 
sent down to them through His Messenger Muhammad 3% and 
in what was revealed to the previous Prophets in general. Some 
Prophets Allah mentioned by name, while He did not mention 
the names of many others. Allah directed the believers to 
refrain from differentiating between the Prophets and to believe 
in them all. They should avoid imitating whomever Allah 
described as, 

Ort wets AEROS at, EB ONS ths St SG A ST obysp 
Cis Sf 8 AG eo aS isd J 


¢And wish to make distinction between Allah and His 

Messengers (by believing in Allah and disbelieving in His 

Messengers) saying, ‘We believe in some but reject others," 

and wish to adopt a way in between. They are in truth 

disbelievers> (4:150-151). 

Al-Bukhari narrated that Abu Hurayrah said, “The People of 
the Book used to read the Torah in Hebrew and translate it 
into Arabic for the Muslims. The Messenger of Allah 3% said, 


i Uf us at Gi SJ, pa nadt V5 tish yal git vo 
‘Do not believe the People of the Book, nor reject what they 


say. Rather, say, ‘We believe in Allah and in what was sent 
down to us.» 


Also, Muslim, Abu Dawud and An-Nasai recorded that Ibn 
‘Abbas said, “Mostly, the Messenger of Allah #% used to recite, 


4H ISG A np 


qWe believe in Allah and that which has been sent down to us> 
(2:136), and, 


dS As Oh igi it au> 


<We believe in Allah, and bear witness that we are Muslims 
(i.e. we submit to Allah)> (3:52) during the two (voluntary) 


Ul Fath Al-Bari 8:20. 


412 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Rak ‘at before Fajr.”\"! 

Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ and Qatadah said. “Al-Asbat are the 
twelve sons of Jacob, and each one of them had an Ummah of 
people from his descendants. This is why they were called Al- 
Asbat.”?! Al-Khalil bin Ahmad and others said, “Al-Asbat 
among the Children of Israel are just like the tribes among the 
Children of Ismail.” This means that the Ashdt are the various 
tribes of the Children of Israel, among whom Allah sent several 
Prophets. Moses said to the Children of Israel, 


63 Kices TI Ks Se Xie at cy oD 


Remember the favor of Allah to you: when He made Prophets 
among you, made you kings} (5:20). Also, Allah said, 


bcs oe gat eli 
<And We divided them into twelve tribes> (7:160). 
Al-Qurtubi said, “Sibt is the group of people or a tribe all 
belonging to the same ancestors.”9 
Qataddah said, “Allah commanded the believers to believe in 
Him and in all His Books and Messengers.”*! Also, Sulayman 


bin Habib said, “We were commanded to believe in the 
(original) Torah and Injil, but not to implement them. 15] 


2 5 eas Seo AB a3 Vaal 3. oa pte G be Gas 36> 

EMSs | 4 3a5 eran a Ze Sh 55 ait 3 ine any Laci tai 
4137. So if they believe in the like of that which you believe 
then they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, then they 
are only in opposition. So Allah will suffice for you against 
them. And He is the Hearer, the Knower.> 


4138. [Our Sibghah (religion) is] the Sibghah of Allah (Islam) 
and which Sibghah can be better than Allah’s? And we are His 
worshippers .> 


11 Muslim 1:502, Abu Dawud 2:46, An-Nasai in Al-Kubra 6 :339. 
[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :399. 

13] Al-Qurtubi 2:141. 

(41 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:400. 

{Sl Ibid. 


Stirali 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 413 


Allah said, if they, the disbelievers among the People of the 
Book and other disbelievers, believe in all of Allah’s Books and 
Messengers and do not differentiate between any of them, 


u oe 
€i,2ai a> 


<then they are rightly guided> meaning, they would acquire the 
truth and be directed to it. 


55 a5> 
¢but if they turn away> from truth to falsehood after proof had 
been presented to them, 
i HERG Gis g ch Usp 
¢then they are only in opposition. So Allah will suffice you against 
them> meaning, Allah will aid the believers against them, 
Encl Ratt 385 
¢And He is the Hearer, the Knower>. Allah said, 
€ ail tized 
<The Sibghah of Allahp. Ad-Dahhak said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
commented, “The religion of Allah.”"! This Tafsir was also 
reported of Mujahid, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Tkrimah, Ibrahim, Al- 
Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, ‘Abdullah bin Kathir, ‘Atiyah Al- 
‘Awfi, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, As-Suddi and other scholars.2! The 
Ayah, 
4a Stsp 
€Allah’s Fitrah (i.e. Allah's Islamic Monotheism)> (30:30) directs 
Muslims to, “Hold to it.” 
Gye S385 Shel SS, dd Gy seks 5 hs Af a CEA WD 
BB SAE LNG atts GR Les teal 81 OSH ol 
EE Jah ES A Se fie TAGE ES Ok AN ss JS At oh 
OY i oie Y5 EG RG ir ed Gk SE as ergs 
CWS 
(1 thn Abi Hatim 1:402. 
(21 Tbn Abi Hatim 1:403. 


414 Tafsir Ibn_Kathir 


€139. Say (O Muhammad x to the Jews and Christians), 
“Dispute you with us about Allah while He is our Lord and 
your Lord? And we are to be rewarded for our deeds and you 
for your deeds. And we are sincere to Him (i.e. we worship 
Him alone and none else, and we obey His orders).’’> 


4140. Or say you that Ibrahim, Ismd‘il, Ishaq, Ya‘qub and Al- 
Asbat, were Jews or Christians? Say, ‘Do you know better or 
does Allah? And who is more unjust than he who conceals the 
testimony he has from Allah? And Allah is not unaware of 
what you do.”> 


4141. That was a nation who has passed away. They shall 
receive the reward of what they earned, and you of what you 
earn. And you will not be asked of what they used to do.> 


Allah directed His Prophet 3% to pre-empt the arguments with 
the idolators: 


al 5 GALI Bp 


<Say (O Muhammad 3% to the Jews and Christians), “Dispute you 
with us about Allah> meaning, “Do you dispute with us regarding 
the Oneness of Allah, obedience and submission to Him and in 
avoiding His prohibitions, 


SRNR OSITS 2 
qwhile He is our Lord and your Lord?> meaning, He has full 


control over us and you, and deserves the worship alone 
without partners. 


qxhcsl SS, Chel Tp 
<And we are to be rewarded for our deeds and you for your deeds.> 
meaning, we disown you and what you worship, just as you 
disown us. Allah said in another Ayah, 
Shes 1 4a OH dal & ag A Xe KG ye Je GE asp 
<> 
<And if they belie you, say: “For me are my deeds and for you 


are your deeds! You are innocent of what I do, and I am 
innocent of what you do!"’> (10:41), and, 


eke, 


Borge we 2 oe Bereg the ad ae 
<a ro BD Sety Cal Jad del ip> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-1) 415 


<So if they dispute with you (Muhammad 3%) say: “I have 
submitted myself to Allah (in Islam), and (so have) those who 
follow me’) (3:20). Allah said about Ibrahim, 


4A 3 SRG 56 25 csp 
€His people disputed with him. He said: “Do you dispute with 
me concerning Allah’’> (6:80), and, 
Costs 4 pein E sll Aly 
¢Have you not looked at him who disputed with Ibrahim about 
his Lord (Allah)?} (2:258). He said in this honorable Ayah, 
arnt 6 38s Kia AG dod HD 


<And we are to be rewarded for our deeds and you for your deeds. 
And we are sincere to Him.» meaning, “We disown you just as 
you disown us,” 


€iyise 4 L25> 
«And we are sincere to Him}, in worship and submission. 
Allah then criticized them in the claim that Ibrahim, the 


Prophets who came after him and the Asbdt were following 
their religion, whether Judaism or Christianity. Allah said, 


Cif fat is Sip 
<Say, “Do you know better or does Allah?» meaning, Allah has 


the best knowledge and He stated that they were neither Jews, 
nor Christians. Similarly, Allah said in the Ayah, 


CMEGEN & 06 WS OS Lt OE SSS OS 5 tata OF 
<lbrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a true 
Muslim Hanifa (to worship none but Allah alone) and he was 


not of Al-Mushrikin> (3:67) and the following Aydt. Allah 
also said, 


ty, Py 444 472, < 1h ene 
ail Sa pee HAGE BT oh ail 55 


€And who is more unjust than he who conceals the testimony he has 
from Allah?> (2:140). Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, “They used to 
recite the Book of Allah He sent to them that stated that the 
true religion is Islam and that Muhammad 3& is the Messenger 


416 Tafsir_Ibn_Kathir 


of Allah. Their Book also stated that Ibrahim, Ismail, Ishaq, 
Ya‘qub and the tribes were neither Jews, nor Christians. They 
testified to these facts, yet hid them from the people. Allah’s 
statement, 
KSC he jak at 05> 

And Allah is not unaware of what you do>, is a threat and a 
warning that His knowledge encompasses every one’s deeds, 
and He shall award each accordingly. Allah then said, 


ve ee Bot 


$24 5% EN asp 


That was a nation who has passed away.» meaning, existed before 


you, 
CS G BS LT UGS 
<They shall receive the reward of what they earned, and you of what 
you earn.» meaning, they bear their deeds while you bear yours, 
igs IW Ke BEA 5p 

¢And you will not be asked of what they used to doy meaning, the 
fact that you are their relatives will not suffice, unless you 
imitate their good deeds. Further, do not be deceived by the 
fact that you are their descendants, unless you imitate them in 
obeying Allah’s orders and following His Messengers who were 
sent as warners and bearers of good news. Indeed, whoever 
disbelieves in even one Prophet, will have disbelieved in all the 
Messengers, especially if one disbelieves in the master and 
Final Messenger from Allah, the Lord of the worlds, to all 
mankind and the Jinns. May Allah’s peace and blessings be on 
Muhammad #% and the rest of Allah’s Prophets. 


mae 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2) 417 


RS ae ISU ie de & 
prediceS AIS EG Be 
GUS Kelis iG GD nae 
ili gs SHI ANS Ne Ta 


1 = Be Bere, te ee 


Seiki daviyees Misi 
¢ Raa oe ee gt, ela ae Ze ow 
GNEVYGN Sh ols aia it 
oe 4 2 ue ray, voice se 
Ral Rai oat 2h aad ANB ail se 
ba, én 
her} 


oI & eat Se ae 
be a eels oF G5 


£ 


rette 4 sete te # Se, 
ead Gti a de 


a Oa oe 
pie del 5 
fe sete tee ee 
Bi adi the by ae 
Se “fee Go ae oo 4b 
te ot A yy Ge oe 


vg 06 


eo we Fee, 
ACN 3 yey OG 06%) 8 


» CH sh 
aye 


ec NE AG ISQ SAGE | Se E Se 
” : s 7 - 


tee 


EM BY RS SF os 
ied HN Oe ws SE ia 


a 4 fhe 
syd ntl aif oy ay 


” deo bye thee an, wo eS oe te 
SMS SEE Kab io nS Ua Bog al pol 

CYS ee ed on oe Ue ae oe iad seen & 
sc oe 


ode ow A eee dS 4- ae 7 othe fo Ber Arergey 

SASL NoMesligh & alee eve 
* © yrve, ? Ser irre, 6 fe ee ete ae] 

eal i's NB, Eid TOC Ply 


wpe Tee oe ce 


3 7% ora oa < 
AAG pBdlgal Sa shegl 5 seals 
G wip jay ii, dice 


€142. The fools 
(idolators, 
hypocrites, and 
Jews) among the 
people will say: 
“What has turned them (Muslims) from their Qiblah [prayer 
direction (towards Jerusalem)] to which they used to face in 
prayer.” Say (O Muhammad #3): “To Allah belong both, east 
and the west. He guides whom He wills to the straight way.”’> 


4143. Thus We have made you [true Muslims — real believers 
of Islamic Monotheism, true followers of Prophet Muhammad 
#8 and his Sunnah (legal ways)], a Wasat (just and the best) 
nation, that you be witnesses over mankind and the Messenger 
(Muhammad 3%) be a witness over you. And We made the 
Qiblah which you used to face, only to test those who followed 
the Messenger (Muhammad #3) from those who would turn on 
their heels (i.e., disobey the Messenger). Indeed it was great 
(heavy, difficult) except for those whom Allah guided. And 


418 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost (i.e., 
your prayers offered towards Jerusalem). Truly, Allah is full of 
kindness, the Most Merciful towards mankind .> 


Changing the Qiblah — Direction of the Prayer 


Imam Al-Bukhari reported that Al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib narrated: 
“Allah’s Messenger #% offered his prayers facing Bayt Al-Maqdis 
(Jerusalem) for sixteen or seventeen months, but he wished 
that he could pray facing the Ka‘bah (at Makkah). The first 
prayer which he offered (facing the Ka‘bah) was the ‘Asr 
(Afternoon) prayer in the company of some people. Then one of 
those who had offered that prayer with him, went out and 
passed by some people in a mosque who were in the bowing 
position (in Ruku} during their prayers (facing Jerusalem). He 
addressed them saying, ‘By Allah, I bear witness that I have 
offered prayer with the Prophet 2% facing Makkah (Ka‘bah).’ 
Hearing that, those people immediately changed their direction 
towards the House (Ka‘bah) while still as they were (i.e., in the 
same bowing position). Some Muslims who offered prayer 
towards the previous Qiblah (Jerusalem) before it was changed 
towards the House (the Ka‘bah in Makkah) had died or had 
been martyred, and we did not know what to say about them 
(regarding their prayers towards Jerusalem). Allah then 
revealed: 


4425 God otc, di oy Key Aad fae wp 
€And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost 
(i.e., the prayers of those Muslims were valid) (2:143).” 


Al-Bukhari!'! collected this narration, while Muslim!?! 
collected it using another chain of narrators. Muhammad bin 
Ishaq reported that Al-Bara’ narrated: Allah’s Messenger 2 
used to offer prayers towards Bayt Al-Maqdis {in Jerusalem), 
but would keep looking at the sky awaiting Allah’s command (to 
change the Qibiah). Then Allah revealed: 


12 4°% eit a wtf 
is GS SS G25 ie ays Aci & dyes MS GF Hep 
4500 scsi 


(1 Fath ALBari 8:20. 
(21 Muslim 1 :375. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagaraht (125 - 149) (Part-2) 419 


<Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad’s) face 
towards the heaven. Surely, We shall turn you to a Qiblah 
(prayer direction) that shall please you, so turn your face in the 
direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah) .> (2:144) 


A man from among the Muslims then said, “We wish we 
could know about those among us who died before the Qiblah 
was changed (i.e., towards Makkah) and also about our own 
prayers, that we had performed towards Bayt Al-Maqdis.” 
Allah then revealed: 


404 add AE 5p 
€And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost.> 
(2:143) 


The fools among the people, meaning the People of the 
Scripture (Jews and Christians), said, “What made them 
change the former Qiblah that they used to face?” Allah then 
revealed: 


oi a Si 


<The fools (idolators, hypocrites, and Jews) among the people 
will say...» 

until the end of the Ayah:!!! 

‘Ali bin Abu Talhah related that Ibn ‘Abbds said: When 
Allah’s Messenger # migrated to Al-Madinah, Allah 
commanded him to face Bayt Al-Maqdis (Jerusalem). The Jews 
were delighted then. Allah’s Messenger i& faced Jerusalem for 
over ten months. However, he liked (to offer prayer in the 
direction of} Prophet Ibrahim’s Qiblah (the Ka‘bah in Makkah) 
and used to supplicate to Allah and kept looking up to the sky 
(awaiting Allah’s command in this regard). Allah then revealed: 


hut Kats UN3> 
dturn your faces (in prayer) in that direction .> 


meaning, its direction. The Jews did not like this change and 
said, “What made them change the Qiblah that they used to 
face (meaning Jerusalem)?” Allah revealed: 


foto pe AMG A re OASG GL i> 


() Al-Qurtubi 3:133. 


420 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<Say (O Muhammad #3): “To Allah belong both, east and the 
west. He guides whom He wills to the straight way.’’>""! 


There are several other Ahddith on this subject. In summary, 
Allah’s Messenger # was commanded to face Bayt Al-Maqdis 
(during the prayer) and he used to offer prayer towards it in 
Makkah between the two corners (of Ka‘bah), so that the 
Ka‘bah would be between him and Bayt Al-Maqdis8. When the 
Prophet # migrated to Al-Madinah, this practice was no longer 
possible; then Allah commanded him to offer prayer towards 
Bayt Al-Maqdis, as Ibn Abbas and the majority of the scholars 
have stated. 

Al-Bukhari reported in his Sahih that the news (of the 
change of Qiblah) was conveyed to some of the Ansar while 
they were performing the ‘Asr (Afternoon) prayer towards Bayt 
Al-Maqdis, upon hearing that, they immediately changed their 
direction and faced the Ka‘bah."?! 

It is reported in the Sahihayn (Al-Bukhari & Muslim) that 
Ibn ‘Umar narrated: While the people were in Quba’ (Mosque) 
performing the Fajr (Dawn) prayer, a man came and said, “A 
(part of the) Qur’4n was revealed tonight to Allah’s Messenger 
3 and he was commanded to face the Ka‘bah. Therefore, face 
the Ka‘bah. They were facing Ash-Sham, so they turned 
towards the Ka‘bah.!*! 

These Hadiths prove that the Ndsikh (a Text that abrogates a 
previous Text) only applies after one acquires knowledge of it, 
even if the Ndsikh had already been revealed and announced. 
This is why the Companions mentioned above were not 
commanded to repeat the previous ‘Asr, Maghrib and ‘Isha’ 
prayers (although they had prayed them towards Jerusalem 
after Allah had changed the Qibiah). Allah knows best. 

When the change of Qiblah (to Ka‘bah in Makkah) occurred, 
those inflicted with hypocrisy and mistrust, and the 
disbelieving Jews, both were led astray from the right guidance 
and fell into confusion. They said: 


Lee ty te y Sen 2 et Za ge 
qe i Be 5 > 
0) At-Tabari 3:138. 


[2] Al-Bukhari no. 399. These people were from the tribe of Banu 
Salamah. 


3] Fath ALBari 8:24, and Muslim 1 :375. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2) 421 


What has turned them (Muslims) from their Qiblah to which 
they used to face in prayer. > 


They asked, “What is the matter with these people (Muslims) 
who one time face this direction (Jerusalem), and then face 
that direction (Makkah)?” Allah answered their questions when 
He stated: 


<Say (O Muhammad 3): “To Allah belong both, east and the 
west .> 


meaning, the command, the decision and the authority are for 
Allah Alone. Hence: 


sil 225 US ep 


¢...s0 wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the 
Face of Allah (and He is High above, over His Throne).> 
(2:115), 


and: 
Fe nae oe St tete role Bote sre ober pa td 4 cee ved 
dak Gas BSS pass GAN TS its IWS ol Bi > 


€ It is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness) that you turn your 
faces towards east and (or) west (in prayers); but Al-Birr is the 
one who believes in Allah.> (2:177) 


This statement means, the best act is to adhere to Allah’s 
commands. Hence, wherever He commands us to face, we 
should face. Also, since obedience requires implementing 
Allah’s commands, if He commands us every day to face 
different places, we are His servants and under His disposal, 
and we face whatever He orders us to face. Certainly, Allah’s 
care and kindness towards His servant and Messenger, 
Muhammad 3, and certainly, his Ummah (Muslim nation) is 
profoundly great. Allah has guided them to the Qiblah of 
(Prophet) Ibrahim — Allah’s Khalil (intimate friend). He has 
commanded them to face the Ka‘bah, the most honorable 
house (of worship) on the face of the earth, which was built by 
Ibrahim Al-Khalil in the Name of Allah, the One without a 
partner. This is why Allah said afterwards: 


4-8 Ye KG oF sag OAS SS Sp 


422 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Say (O Muhammad 3): “To Allah belong both, east and the 
west. He guides whom He wills to the straight way.’’> 
Imam Ahmad reported that ‘A’lishah (the Prophet’s wife) said 
that Allah’s Messenger # said about the People of the 
Scripture (Jews and Christians): 


WS far Gs gh Bab 6) Ge Cats US oat le Ey Y 


splay ale ys 123 Ye ney tg) aot Clas gl id Je; yz hey 


gerd 
(They do not envy us for a matter more than they envy us for 
Jumu‘ah (Friday) to which Allah has guided us and from which 
they were led astray; for the (true) Qiblah to which Allah has 
directed us and from which they were led astray; and for our 
saying ‘Amin’ behind the Imam (leader of the prayer) .»!"! 


The Virtues of Muhammad’s Nation 
Allah said: 
444s ae ji 535 wilt & aagt iyeoed 25 43 a3 AR civ NSS > 


<Thus We have made you [true Muslims], a Wasat (just) (and 
the best) nation, that you be witnesses over mankind and the 
Messenger (Muhammad #3) be a witness over you .> 


Allah stated that He has changed our Qiblah to the Qiblah of 
Ibrahim and chose it for us so that He makes us the best 
nation ever. Hence, we will be the witnesses over the nations 
on the Day of Resurrection, for all of them will then agree 
concerning our virtue. The word Wasat in the Ayah means the 
best and the most honored. Therefore, saying that (the 
Prophet’s tribe) Quraysh is in the Wasat regarding Arab tribes 
and their areas, means the best. Similarly, saying that Allah’s 
Messenger #2 was in the Wasat of his people, means he was 
from the best subtribe. Also, ‘Asr, the prayer that is described 
as ‘Wusta’ (a variation of the word Wasat), means the best 
prayer, as the authentic collections of Ahddith reported. Since 
Allah made this Ummah (Muslim nation) the Wasat, He has 
endowed her with the most complete legislation, the best 


(1 Ahmad 6:134. 


Strah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2 423 


Manhaj (way, method, etc.,} and the clearest Madhhab 
(methodology, mannerism, etc). Allah said: 


ee nih KI a GE & oll g Re Se KG Ay 
Call I A KG KG Cat UP KO os SF oe et 
«He has chosen you (to convey His Message of Islamic 
Monotheism to mankind), and has not laid upon you in religion 
any hardship: it is the religion of your father Ibrahim. It is He 
(Allah) Who has named you Muslims both before and in this 
(the Qur'an), that the Messenger (Muhammad #) may be a 
witness over you and you be witnesses over mankind! (22:78) 
Moreover, Imam Ahmad reported that Abu Sa‘id narrated: 
Allah’s Messenger 2 said: 
SUB U5 255 sd OS eek Jo Ss ua oy 22 Ged 
bah HB gst be UE Gs 2 ty Cet GSS 55 Sb je 
uss ih Keke iG SY WW ve i; es 0, 8 hs 
nscle gh S pstdy 35588 0255 adi bog, :u 
‘Nuh will be called on the Day of Resurrection and will be 
asked, ‘Have you conveyed (the Message)?’ He will say, ‘Yes.’ 
His people will be summoned and asked, ‘Has Nuh conveyed 
(the Message) to you?’ They will say, ‘No warner came to us 
and no one (Prophet) was sent to us.’ Nuh will be asked, ‘Who 
testifies for you?’ He will say, ‘Muhammad and his Ummah.’ » 
This is why Allah said: 
<Thus We have made you a Wasat nation. > 
The Prophet # said; 


‘The Wasat means the ‘Adl (just). You will be summoned to 


testify that Nuh has conveyed (his Message), and I will attest to 
your testimony.»!11 


It was also recorded by Al-Bukhari, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa’i 
and Ibn Majah.!?! 


(1 Ahmad 3:32. 


(21 Fath AL-Bari 8:21, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8:297, An-Nasa’ in Al-Kubra 
6 :292, and Ibn Majah 2 :1432. 


424 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Imam Ahmad also reported that Abu Said Khudri narrated: 
Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


BO OS pda US be Bly yok day wea 65 gt tt 
to Ou ne bis faags SAL sD Jus YS ES ens eat 
Of GAG ae GE Ge IS eke ty UU ad IS oy 
Voe GU duscy Sat Keke asp 355 Se Sys a A pets 
Cig Ke SA O55 AU TE ed UG TH Kus BSG 
‘The Prophet would come on the Day of Resurrection with two 
or more people (his only following!), and his people would also 
be summoned and asked, ‘Has he (their Prophet) conveyed (the 
Message) to you?’ They would say, ‘No.’ He would be asked, 
‘Have you conveyed (the Message) to your people?’ He would 
say, ‘Yes.’ He would be asked, ‘Who testifies for you?’ He 
would say, ‘Muhammad and his Ummah.’ Muhammad and his 
Ummah would then be summoned and asked, ‘Has he conveyed 
(the Message) to his people?’ They would say, ‘Yes.’ They 
would be asked, ‘Who told you that?’ They would say, ‘Our 


Prophet (Muhammad) came to us and told us that the 
Messengers have conveyed (their Messages) .’» 


Hence Allah’s statement: 
<€Thus We have made you a Wasat nation .> 


He said, “(meaning) the ‘Adil,’ (he then continued reciting the 
Ayah): 


Cis KG UL AKG UA FTE Be ules eh dee yp 
<Thus We have made you, a just (and the best) nation, that 


you be witnesses over mankind and the Messenger (Muhammad 
3%) be a witness over you.p”\") 


Furthermore, Imam Ahmad reported that Abul-Aswad 
narrated: I came to Al-Madinah and found that an epidemic 
had broken out that caused many fatalities. I sat next to 


11] Ahmad 3:58. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2 425 


‘Umar bin Al-Khattaéb once when a funeral procession started 
and the people praised the dead person. ‘Umar said, “Wajabat 
(it will be recorded as such), Wajabatt” Then another funeral 
was brought forth and the people criticized the dead person. 
Again, ‘Umar said, “Wajabat.” Abul-Aswad asked, “What is 
Wajabat, O Leader of the faithful?” He said, “I said just like 
Allah’s Messenger #2 had said: 


OW 350 Cs, GE Oe tia an ssl A hd at be Veit 

doth 32 SLE cathe SU sotdhy AS OU hist je 
tAny Muslim for whom four testify that he was righteous, then 
Allah will enter him into Paradise.’ We said, ‘What about 
three?’ He said, ‘And three.’ We said, ‘And two?’ He said, 
‘And two.’ We did not ask him about (the testimony) of one 
(believing) person v4" 


This was also recorded by Al-Bukhari, At-Tirmidhi, and An- 
Nasai.!?! 


The Wisdom behind changing the Qiblah 
Allah then said: 


Sores 


ol sae KB OE ot LA Ak of a Ye ot all che yp 
C5 6B GA EV OS EF 
¢And We made the Qiblah (prayer direction towards Jerusalem) 
which you used to face, only to test those who followed the 
Messenger (Muhammad #3) from those who would turn on 
their heels (i.e., disobey the Messenger). Indeed it was great 
(heavy, difficult) except for those whom Allah guided.» 
Allah states thus: We have legislated for you, O 
Muhammad, facing Bayt Al-Maqdis at first and then changed 


it to the Ka‘bah so as to find who will follow and obey you and 
thus face whatever you face. 


dsrae Fs 
¢...from those who would turn on their heels .> 


0 Ahmad 1:21. 
[21 Fath Al-Bari 3:271, Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 4 :166, and An-Nasaii 4:51. 


426 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


meaning, reverts from his religion. [Allah then said:] 
45,5 EE oh5> 
¢Indeed it was great (heavy, difficult)> 


The Ayah indicates that changing the Qiblah from Bayt Al- 
Maqdis to the Ka‘bah is heavy on the heart, except for 
whomever Allah has rightly guided their hearts, who believe in 
the truth of the Messenger 3% with certainty and that whatever 
he was sent with is the truth without doubt. It is they who 
believe that Allah does what He wills, decides what He wills, 
commands His servants with what He wills, abrogates any of 
His commands that He wills, and that He has the perfect 
wisdom and the unequivocal proof in all this. (The attitude of 
the believers in this respect is) unlike those who have a disease 
in their hearts, to whom whenever a matter occurs, it causes 
doubts, just as this same matter adds faith and certainty to the 
believers. Similarly, Allah said: 


- 4 * . ’ re oo ee 2 on Py a a 
an alt Ob oy ah 2G Re ds oh SAE yp 


4 ° oper ee -¢ an Fe ster ode - Pe raed 
S) Mey EN et nyt og onli Oh mays 5) Ky 2G 


tity 
€And whenever there comes down a Siirah (chapter from the 
Qur'an), some of them (hypocrites) say : “Which of you has had 
his faith increased by it?” As for those who believe, it has 
increased their faith, and they rejoice. But as for those in whose 
hearts is a disease (of doubt, disbelief and hypocrisy), it will add 
doubt and disbelief to their doubt and disbelief; and they die 
while they are disbelievers.> (9:124, 125) 

and: 


aS re Go ae rr ee che ebte horde 
CLIO YY Stl ay See Ty tlhe a on rai & ES; 


€And We send down of the Qur‘an that which is a healing and 


a mercy to those who believe, and it increases the wrongdoers in 
nothing but loss.> (17:82) 


Certainly, those who remained faithful to the Messenger 2%, 
obeyed him and faced whatever Allah commanded them, 
without doubt or hesitation, were the leaders of the 
Companions. Some scholars stated that the Early Migrants 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2) 427 


(who migrated with the Prophet # from Makkah to Al-Madinah) 
and Ansar (the residents of Al-Madinah who gave aid and 
refuge to both the Prophet 3% and the Migrants) were those who 
offered prayers towards the two Qiblah (Bayt Al-Maqdis and 
then the Ka‘bah). 

Al-Bukhari reported in the explanation of the Ayah (2:143) 
that Ibn ‘Umar narrated: While the people were performing the 
Fajr (Dawn) prayer in the Quba’ Mosque, a man came and 
said, “Qur’4n was revealed to the Prophet #% and he was 
ordered to face the Ka‘bah. Therefore, face the Ka‘bah.” They 
then faced the Ka‘bah.'] Muslim also recorded it.!?! 

At-Tirmidhi added that they were performing Ruku‘ (bowing 
down in prayer), and then changed the direction (of the 
Qiblah) to the Ka‘bah while still bowing down.'*! Muslim 
reported this last narration from Anas.'*! These Hadiths all 
indicate the perfect obedience the Companions had for Allah 
and His Messenger # and their compliance with Allah’s 
commandments, may Allah be pleased with them all. 

Allah said: 

424 feat) HE wap 

¢And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost .> 
meaning, the reward of your prayers towards Bayt Al-Maqdis 
before would not be lost with Allah. It is reported in Sahih that 
Abu Ishaq As-Sabiy related that Bara’ narrated: “The people 
asked about the matter of those who offered prayers towards 


Bayt Al-Maqdis and died (before the Qiblah was changed to 
Ka‘bah). Allah revealed: 


BE feet) Bl SE 5p 
€And Allah would never make your faith (prayers) to be lost.>” 
It was also recorded by At-Tirmidhi from Ibn ‘Abbas, and At- 
Tirmidhi graded it Sahih.'5! 
Ibn Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: 


01 Fath AL-Bari 8:22. 

[2] Muslim 1 :375. 

IS) Typfat A-Ahwadhi 8 :300. 

(41 Muslim 1:375. 

(SI Fath Al-Bari 8:20, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8 :300. 


428 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


GK} iat Hl SE cap 
¢And Allah would never make your faith to be lost.> 


entails: Your (prayer towards) the first Qiblah and your 
believing your Prophet and obeying him by facing the second 
Qiblah; He will grant you the rewards for all these acts. 
Indeed, 


4505 Sy etch ail yp 


<Truly, Allah is full of kindness, the Most Merciful towards 
mankind >") 


Furthermore, it is reported in the Sahih that Allah’s 
Messenger 3% saw a woman among the captives who was 
separated from her child. Whenever she found a boy (infant) 
among the captives, she would hold him close to her chest, as 
she was looking for her boy. When she found her child, she 
embraced him and gave him her breast to nurse. Allah’s 
Messenger 3% said: 


GY sisi cetsshl ¥ of le had 95 Og Ga; Eb ow Sy fte 

tly od Se sally (SII aitgin IU at J25 
‘Do you think that this woman would willingly throw her son 
in the fire?) They said, “No, O Messenger of Allah!” He 


said, «By Allah! Allah is more merciful with His servants than 
this woman with her son .»'?! 


spac 3b as JG OS ta SS Lapras ears 
on Sol SN SE Cast BA Gall Gy as Keys WS 2h uw by Suc 
<0 vases Se yas st 5 as 

€144.Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) 
face towards the heaven. Surely, We shall turn you to a Qiblah 
(prayer direction) that shall please you, so turn your face in the 
direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah). And wheresoever 
you people are, turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction. 
Certainly, the people who were given the Scripture (i.e., Jews 


(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:99. 
!2] Muslim 4:2109. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2) 429 


and Christians) know well that, that (your turning towards the 
direction of the Ka‘bah at Makkah in prayers) is the truth from 
their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they doy. 


The First Abrogation in the Qur’an was about the Qiblah 


‘Ali bin Abu Talhah related that Ibn ‘Abbas narrated: The 
first abrogated part in the Qur’an was about the Qiblah. When 
Allah’s Messenger 3% migrated to Al-Madinah, the majority of 
its people were Jews, and Allah commanded him to face Bayt 
Al-Maqdis. The Jews were delighted then. Allah’s Messenger 3 
faced it for ten and some months, but he liked to face the 
Qiblah of Ibrahim (Ka‘bah in Makkah). He used to supplicate to 
Allah and look up to the sky (awaiting Allah’s command). Allah 
then revealed: 


eat § dyes cl 25 Bp 
<Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face 
towards the heaven>, until, 
EE Kats 5d 
¢turn your faces (in prayer) in that direction. > 
The Jews did not like this ruling and said: 
25 St BSE SH A A OD 
¢‘‘What has turned them (Muslims) from their Qiblah (prayer 
direction) to which they used to face in prayer.” Say (O 
Muhammad), “To Allah belong both, east and the west.’’> 
(2:142)!1! 
Allah said: 
dist 25 US 

¢...s0 wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces) there is the 
Face of Allah} (2:115), 

and: 

dias & Cbs ot UA LE of a VE Bt Ea cee tp 

¢<And We made the Qiblah (prayer direction towards Jerusalem) 


(1) fbn Abi Hatim 1:103. 


430 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


which you used to face, only to test those who followed the 
Messenger (Muhammad 3%) from those who would turn on 
their heels (i.e., disobey the Messenger) .> (2:143) 


Is the Qiblah the Ka ‘bah itself or its General Direction? 
Al-Hakim related that ‘Ali bin Abu Talib said: 


4 apc 3h ans Ip 


€...s0 turn your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram 
(at Makkah).>» means its direction.”""! 


Al-Hakim then commented that the chain of this narration is 
authentic and that they (i.e., Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not 
include it in their collections. 

This ruling concerning the Qiblah is also the opinion of Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah, Mujahid, Ikrimah, Sa‘id bin Jubayr, Qatadah, Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas and others.!?! 

Allah’s Statement: 

CEE Kats NS BE u bs 

¢And wheresoever you people are, turn your faces (in prayer) 

in that direction > 
is a command from Allah to face the Ka‘bauh from wherever 
one is on the earth: the east, west, north or south. The 
exception is of the voluntary prayer (Nafl) while one is 
traveling, for one is allowed to offer it in any direction his body 
is facing, while his heart is intending the Ka‘bah. Also, when 
the battle is raging, one is allowed to offer prayer, however he 
is able. Also, included are those who are not sure of the 
direction and offer prayer in the wrong direction, thinking that 
it is the direction of the Qiblah, because Allah does not burden 
a soul beyond what it can bear. 


The Jews had Knowledge that the (Muslim) Qiblah 
would later be changed 
Allah stated that: 
4045 on SS 5h CSCI BN Salt 5p 


fy Al-Mustadrak 2 :269. 
2! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:107-109. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2 431 


<Certainly, the people who were given the Scripture (i.e., Jews 
and the Christians) know well that, that (your turning towards 
the direction of the Ka‘bah at Makkah in prayers) is the truth 
from their Lord. > 


This Ayah means: The Jews, who did not like that you 
change your Qiblah from Bayt Al-Maqdis, already knew that 
Allah will command you (O Muhammad) to face the Ka‘bah. 
The Jews read in their Books their Prophets’ description of 
Allah’s Messenger # and his Ummah, and that Allah has 
endowed and honored him with the complete and honorable 
legislation. Yet, the People of the Book deny these facts because 
of their envy, disbelief and rebellion. This is why Allah 
threatened them when He said: 


46s Ue yas St usp 
€And Allah is not unaware of what they do.> 


3 


ty oe, 


om om Pa ‘pe a rr er wte ehh ow Se rere a te 
5 RO at CN GG ASE ae KK Casi UB Gall Cot > 

“AG, 12 8 4.7 - wpe =e ord, Pe - “ 
WS) LN le BA AS baal SOT SS Ges hd gt 

2 450 Sault 35 


¢145. And even if you were to bring to the People of the 
Scripture (Jews and Christians) all the Aydt (proofs, evidences, 
verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.), they would not follow 
your Qiblah (prayer direction), nor are you going to follow their 
Qiblah. And they will not follow each other’s Qiblah. Verily, if 
you follow their desires after that which you have received of 
knowledge (from Allah), then indeed you will be one of the 
wrongdoers .> 


The Stubbornness and Disbelief of the Jews 


Allah describes the Jews’ disbelief, stubbornness and 
defiance of what they know of the truth of Allah’s Messenger 
#3, that if the Prophet # brought forward every proof to the 
truth of what he was sent with, they will never obey him or 
abandon following their desires. In another instance, Allah said: 

WE i Jee eG MOREY Oy See ok Se ol ap 


are 


453i oct 


432 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


iE Reale <Truly, those, against 

whont the Word (wrath) 

At a ee ce of your Lord has been 

ot God} 5 5 Sallg SS qslyy | justified, will not be- 

Beuscdbrn ye Bae fester te ecityc |] lieve. Even if every sign 

fiivi * Wr: $ 

tate Rb Bo Nes ae should come to them, 

arith SGU GEL s sb | until they see the pain- 

Pe eae Remo ete mee ful torment.» (10:96, 

SP eS ES HD 28S S b '97) 

5 Fea ares SMa EG5 || This is why Allah 

ig 5% est bec: c ACES Ran said here: 

Agard pin p Om iy AY Oglamlic fare as Dba inane woceg uke 
aes Lisi BS ad SS ap 


Seem Ope oe oar 4h 
a1el"s Z\7 - 


¢And even if you were 


cy eee oe CODEN oe oo Tee 
Eo pdt Ll 99 aSidS po 05 CEST 


vee 
“ CaATN ae 
rece = 


No 


Aes. ere for te Pare nid 
pent p39 ASCE 55 Sian sci : 
eve 4 7 Se oy Zur oe “re 
(po ps ant Boe EHS Kosta us 


eet bene, voc oe Pte ob OZ iS ue. ye if 
pride ae 5555 ahh oy t2 KG Ae || to bring to the People of 


heh 26 ee ICN EE (|| the Scripture (Jews and 
e : 2x ¢ SESS pend Christians) all the Aydt 
SESH A Ea h85 Ean 535 ashe Ke Ms (proofs, evidences, 


AAS MAKES e742 Le |] verses, lessons, signs, 
e a iy Opls SIE Kale, ae revelations, etc.), they 
SNGE Bo ARV Sy Eash S31 | would not follow your 

nates © ee de ot Qiblah (prayer 


Smo ater ce fe ots cetpace 
3 apaiGaly sah caylee irection)>. 
Allah’s statement: 


Ces gh, SA Usp 
¢...nor are you going to follow their Qiblah >, 


indicates the vigor with which Allah’s Messenger 2% 
implements what Allah commanded him. Allah’s statement also 
indicates that as much as the Jews adhere to their opinions 
and desires, the Prophet # adheres by Allah’s commands, 
obeying Him and following what pleases Him, and that he 
would never adhere to their desires in any case. Hence, praying 
towards Bayt Al-Maqdis was not because it was the Qiblah of 
the Jews, but because Allah had commanded it. Allah then 
warns those who knowingly defy the truth, because the proof 
against those who know is stronger than against other people. 
This is why Allah said to His Messenger 3% and his Ummah: 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (125 - 149) (Part-2) 433 
Kpest 55 thy Hy SU me BU baal SO SS 


<Verily, if you follow their desires after that which you have 
received of knowledge (from Allah), then indeed you will be one 
of the wrongdoers .> 


Os SST SA AG) Oy BI bo Ow BAA Casi Man Sip 
Go GA Se BS BGG oe SSI yy 
146. Those to whom We gave the Scripture (Jews and 
Christians) recognise him (Muhammad 2% or the Ka‘bah at 
Makkah) as they recognize their sons. But verily, a party of 
them conceal the truth while they know it — [i.e., the qualities 
of Muhammad x which are written in the Tawréh and the 
Injil >. 
€147. This is) the truth from your Lord. So be you not one of 
those who doubt». 


The Jews know that the Prophet x is True, but they 
hide the Truth 


Allah states that the scholars of the People of the Scripture 
know the truth of what Allah’s Messenger #% was sent with, 
just as one of them knows his own child, which is a parable 
that the Arabs use to describe what is very apparent. Similarly, 
in a Hadith, Allah’s Messenger # said to a man who had a 
youngster with him: 


gp Agbl at 425 Gps OE olds Si 
Is this your son?» He said, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah! I 
testify to this fact.” Allah’s Messenger #4 said: 
ele eth V5 Ole et YO ch 
‘Well, you would not transgress against him nor would he 
transgress against you alt 


According to Al-Qurtubi, it was narrated that ‘Umar said to 
‘Abdullah bin Salam (an Israelite scholar who became a 
Muslim), “Do you recognize Muhammad as you recognize your 


1M Ahmad 4:163. 


434 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


own son?” He replied, “Yes, and even more. The Honest One 
descended from heaven on the Honest One on the earth with 
his (i.e, Muhammad’s) description and I recognized him, 
although I do not know anything about his mother’s story.”"") 

Allah states next that although they had knowledge and 
certainty in the Prophet 2, they still: 


4 25> 
¢conceal the truth.> 


The Ayah indicates that they hide the truth from the people, 
about the Prophet #%, that they find in their Books, 


Roghis hay 
qwhile they know it.» Allah then strengthens the resolve of His 
Prophet 3% and the believers and affirms that what the Prophet 
#% came with is the truth without doubt, saying: 


<(This is) the truth from your Lord. So be you not one of those 
who doubt .> 


OK ob BSG vB Sait LE Os Ley Kup 
4148. For every nation there is a direction to which they face 
(in their prayers). So hasten towards all that is good. 


Wheresoever you may be, Allah will bring you together (on the 
Day of Resurrection). Truly, Allah is able to do all things. 


se 
a 
& 


Every Nation has a Qiblah 
Al-‘Awfi reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said: 
; usp ity jSI3> 
<For every nation there is a direction to which they face (in 
their prayers)> 
“This talks about followers of the various religions. Hence, 
every nation and tribe has its own Qiblah that they choose, 


11] Al-Qurtubi 2:163. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 435 


while Allah’s appointed Qiblah is what the believers face.”!"! 

Abul-‘Aliyah said, “The Jew has a direction to which he 
faces (in the prayer). The Christian has a direction to which he 
faces. Allah has guided you, O (Muslim) Ummah, to a Qiblah 
which is the true Qiblah.”?! This statement was also related 
to Mujahid, ‘Ata’ Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, As-Suddi, and 
others.!9! 

This last Ayah is similar to what Allah said: 


Cg Std GS) 1405 Sh ees ait eS es fis (Ke Ue Up 

dik aes BL SSS ht Kan 
€To each among you, We have prescribed a law and a clear 
way. If Allah had willed, He would have made you one nation, 
but that (He) may test you in what He has given you; so 


compete in good deeds. The return of you (all) is to Allah.» 
(5:48) 
In the Ayah (2:148), Allah said: 

455 SK ERT Ct HK HS 6 Sp 
<Wheresoever you may be, Allah will bring you together (on 
the Day of Resurrection). Truly, Allah is able to do all things.> 

meaning: He is able to gather you from the earth even if your 
bodies and flesh disintegrated and scattered. 
AB 15 Obs Ga Gal 25S acolo ore te ey 
BEG 255 Wall occll es SS SS es og WOE EG pe 


$25 bee, 7 bd 


peek 5 ee I ead Vy Gt Se Lt 5K is Feat pe NS 
Ce Cris MG Ke ga oY hth 


€149. And from wheresoever you start forth (for prayers), turn 
your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah), 
that is indeed the truth from your Lord. And Allah is not 
unaware of what you do.> 


€150. And from wheresoever you start forth (for prayers), turn 
(1 At-Tabari 3:193. 


[2 thn Abi Hatim 1:121. 
(3! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:121-122. 


436 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


your face in the direction of Al-Masjid Al-Hardam (at Makkah), 
and wheresoever you are, turn your faces towards it (when you 
pray) so that men may have no argument against you except 
those of them that are wrongdoers, so fear them not, but fear 
Me! — And so that I may complete My blessings on you and 
that you may be guided.> 


Why was changing the Qiblah mentioned thrice? 


This is a third command from Allah to face Al-Masjid Al- 
Haram (the Sacred Mosque) from every part of the world 
(during prayer). It was said that Allah mentioned this ruling 
again here because it is connected to whatever is before and 
whatever is after it. Hence, Allah first said: 


en ot boo, AG ste Mele 6 4 on i Bee we 
46-55 ts Gs cai 3 Ayes AE 55 Bp 


<Verily, We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad's) face 
towards the heaven. Surely, We shall turn you to a Qiblah 
(prayer direction) that shall please you} (2:144), until: 


45,05 erg a3 Ue Jats af ay Pe os : 2 Gol a yal ' CASH 13 Sail As} 


sires the people who were given the Scripture (i.e., Jews 
and the Christians) know well that, that (your turning towards 
the direction of the Ka’bah at Makkah in prayers) is the truth 
from their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they do.> 
(2:144) 
Allah mentioned in these Aydt His fulfillment of the Prophet’s 


wish and ordered him to face the Qiblah that he liked and is 
pleased with. In the second command, Allah said: 


“at G5 BSF oe Gall 45 SVAN occ Hes ayes J et fe Hid 

CW SCS Ce at 
<And from wheresoever you start forth (for prayers), turn your 
face in the direction of Al-Masid Al-Haram that is indeed the 
truth from your Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what you 
do.» 


Therefore, Allah states here that changing the Qiblah is also 
the truth from Him, thus upgrading the subject more than in 
the first Ayah, in which Allah agreed to what His Prophet 2 


Strah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 437 


had wished for. Thus Allah states that this is also the truth 
from Him that He likes and is pleased with. In the third 
command, Allah refutes the Jewish assertion that the Prophet 
#% faced their Qiblah, as they knew in their Books that the 
Prophet 3% will later on be commanded to face the Qiblah of 
Ibrahim, the Ka‘bah. The Arab disbelievers had no more 
argument concerning the Prophet’s Qiblah after Allah 
commanded the Prophet # to face the Qiblah of Ibrahim, which 
is more respected and honored, rather than the Qiblah of the 
Jews. The Arabs used to honor the Ka‘bah and liked the fact 
that the Messenger 3% was commanded to face it. 


The Wisdom behind abrogating the Previous Qiblah 
Allah said: 
€...s0 that men may have no argument against you > 


Therefore, the People of the Book knew from the description 
of the Muslim Ummah that they would be ordered to face the 
Ka‘bah. If the Muslims did not fit this description, the Jews 
would have used this fact against the Muslims. If the Muslims 
had remained on the Qiblah of Bayt Al-Maqdis, which was also 
the Qiblah of the Jews, this fact could have been used as the 
basis of argument by the Jews against other people. 

Allah’s Statement: 


itis lb ai Vp 
<...except those of them that are wrongdoers,> 


indicates the Mushrikin (polytheists) of Quraysh. The reasoning 
of these unjust persons was the unsound statement: “This 
man (Muhammad) claims that he follows the religion of 
Ibrahim! Hence, if his facing Bayt Al-Maqdis was a part of the 
religion of Ibrahim, why did he change it?” The answer to this 
question is that Allah has chosen His Prophet #% to face Bayt 
Al-Maqdis first for certain wisdom, and he obeyed Allah 
regarding this command. Then, Allah changed the Qiblah to the 
Qiblah of Ibrahim, which is the Ka‘bah, and he also obeyed 
Allah in this command. He, obeys Allah in all cases and never 
engages in the defiance of Allah even for an instant, and his 
Ummah imitates him in this. 


438 0 Tafsir Tn Kathir 
Allah said: 
€...so fear them not, but fear Me!> 


meaning: ‘Do not fear the doubts that the unjust, stubborn 
persons raise and fear Me Alone.’ Indeed, Allah Alone deserves 
to be feared. 

Allah said: 


tke gis GAGD 
¢...so that I may complete My blessings on you .> 
This Ayah relates to Allah’s statement: 
a aed. Sele ws 5% Jap 
¢...so that men may have no argument against you}, 
meaning: I will perfect My bounty on you by legislating for you 


to face the Ka‘bah, so that the (Islamic) Shari‘ah (law) is 
complete in every respect. Allah said? 


EOSEG (XLG> 
¢...that you may be guided.>, 
meaning: To be directed and guided to what the nations have 
been led astray from, We have guided you to it and preferred 


you with it.’ This is why this Ummah is the best and most 
honored nation ever. 


Fai IS i A tk ng 
vs d 1ypZenil, ASE agit AGS Bk J Aer te te 
‘<Seit 5 


€151. Similarly (to complete My blessings on you), We have 
sent among you a Messenger (Muhammad 33%) of your own, 
reciting to you Our verses (the Qur'an) and purifying you, and 
teaching you the Book (the Qur'an) and the Hikmah (i.e., 
Sunnah, Islamic laws and Figh — jurisprudence), and teaching 
you that which you did not know.> 


4152. Therefore remember Me (by praying, glorifying). I will 
remember you, and be grateful to Me (for My countless favors 
on you) and never be ungrateful to Me.> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 439 


Muhammad’s Prophecy is a Great Bounty from Allah 


Allah reminds His believing servants with what He has endowed 
them with by sending Muhammad 2% as a Messenger to them, 
reciting to them Allah’s clear Aydt and purifying and cleansing 
them from the worst types of behavior, the ills of the souls and 
the acts of Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic era). The Messenger 2% also 
takes them away from the darkness (of disbelief) to the light (of 
faith) and teaches them the Book, the Qur’an, and the Hikmah 
(i.e., the wisdom), which is his Sunnah. He also teaches them 
what they knew not. During the time of Jdhiliyyah, they used 
to utter foolish statements. Later on, and with the blessing of 
the Prophet’s Message and the goodness of his prophecy, they 
were elevated to the status of the Awliyd’ (loyal friends of Allah) 
and the rank of the scholars. Hence, they acquired the deepest 
knowledge among the people, the most pious hearts, and the 
most truthful tongues. Allah said: 

ae thew 


Kopbats site pple HE pall 3 IS igh i Goadtll Se Sl & Sp 


<Indeed, Allah conferred a great favor on the believers when He 
sent among them a Messenger (Muhammad 2%) from among 
themselves, reciting unto them His verses (the Qur'an), and 
purifying them (from sins) .> (3:164) 
Allah also criticized those who did not give this bounty its 
due consideration, when He said: 


CEG IGM 5 pa LE OH at cas UG Sit Sy 3 lp 

<Have you not seen those who have changed the favors of Allah 

into disbelief (by denying Prophet Muhammad #%) and his 

Message of Islam), and caused their people to dwell in the house 

of destruction? (14:28) 

Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “Allah’s favor means Muhammad.”™! 

Therefore, Allah has commanded the believers to affirm this 
favor and to appreciate it by thanking and remembering Him: 


Co oS SF y eal SoH agis> 
<Therefore, remember Me. I will remember you, and be grateful 
to Me, and never be ungrateful to Me.> 
0) Al-Bukhari no. 3977. 


440 Tafsir _Ibn_ Kathir 
Mujahid said that Allah’s statement: 
Ghats peng CS SD 
€Similarly (to complete My favor on you), We have sent among 
you a Messenger (Muhammad #8) of your own,> 


means: Therefore, remember Me in gratitude to My favor.!1) 
Al-Hasan Al-Basri commented about Allah’s statement: 


€ S55 agit 
«Therefore remember Me. I will remember you>, 
“Remember Me regarding what I have commanded you and I 
will remember you regarding what I have compelled Myself to 


do for your benefit (i.e., His rewards and forgiveness).”?! 
An authentic Hadith states: 
BSG SS 3 Eg Bh AE og 285 yl a Jo 
the GY 
tAllah the Exalted said, ‘Whoever mentions Me to himself, 
then I will mention him to Myself; and whoever mentions Me 
in a gathering, I will mention him in a better gathering»! 
Imam Ahmad reported that Anas narrated that Allah’s 
peace 2 said: 
OL bgt Bg WSS AE 8 S85 ol «pal el & eS 5e al Jip 
ee a OU 5h - Se GE Lg USS 8 3555 
by eG Gb, S53 G3 be SH5 Oy Eg Ge SH We fe SH 
«558 wei es) 5 el 
‘Allah the Exalted said, ‘O son of Adam! If you mention Me to 
yourself, I will mention you to Myself. If you mention Me in a 
gathering, I will mention you in a gathering of the angels (or 
said in a better gathering). If you draw closer to Me by a hand 
span, I will draw closer to you by forearm’s length. If you draw 


closer to Me by a forearm’s length, I will draw closer to you by 
an arm’s length. And if you come to Me walking, I will come 


0) At-Tabari 3:210. 
[2] fbn Abi Hatim 1:141. 
[3] Fath Al-Bari 13 :395. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 441 


fo you running». 

Its chain is Sahih, it 
was recorded by Al- 
Bukhari.!"! Allah 
said: 


C8 VF J yeeath> 


¢...and be grateful to 
Me (for My countless 
favors on you) and 
never be ungrateful to 
Me.> 

In this Ayah, Allah 
commands that He be 
thanked and 
appreciated, and 
promises even more 
rewards for thanking 
Him. Allah said in 
another Ayah: 


STALE A Mb KER NG 
gsrila AlGs pfs 5A OD OyASy 
Lap Bh 5255 BIG IGG a5 
SS MG SOIC at ei IS 
GS sss epiusbile ITI 
KO PARATAINOAMT CO Ricertlres 
Biel aie CNG EEE 
Sally GS Lie GGG Es ikiy 
AG Castecibeccitgtilts SS 
Cipaseega sai Mea AD; ssa 
2AA3 islaleccal lal ING 
poe Lae tres’ 4 
Spaeth aA RET AS fea 
ip EBI 55 @ 


LIMA T SIL 95 Ki 


a 3 2 MG > 
«3 XGN fu 
€2 35 ule Giese 
¢And (remember) 
when your Lord proclaimed: “If you give thanks (by accepting 
faith and worshipping none but Allah), I will give you more (of 
My blessings); but if you are thankless (i.e., disbelievers), 

verily, My punishment is indeed severe .> 
Abu Raja’ Al-‘Utaridi said: Imran bin Husayn came by us 
once wearing a nice silken garment that we never saw him 
wear before or afterwards. He said, “Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


739 SB5 cease Me ci 1 OF Cod an Op tee ale ai dE ya 
tote der 135% 
‘Those whom Allah has favored with a bounty, then Allah likes 


") Ahmad 3:138, Fath AL-Bari 13:52). 


442 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


to see the effect of His bounty on His creation», or he said, “on 
His servant” - according to Ruh (one of the narrators of 
the Hadith)!!! 
J 8 5 eral & St LG ZO ET Lee all Calg 
HOEY GS EA A ce 
4153. O you who believe! Seek help in patience and As-Salah 
(the prayer). Truly, Allah is with Ag-Sabirin (the patient) .> 
4154. And say not of those who are killed in the way of Allah, 
“They are dead.” Nay, they are living, but you perceive (it) 
not.> 


The Virtue of Patience and Prayer 

After Allah commanded that He be appreciated, He ordained 
patience and prayer. It is a fact that the servant is either 
enjoying a bounty that he should be thankful for, or suffering 
a calamity that he should meet with patience. A Hadith states: 


SS KGS tits Sul by 5 ge Se Vy tad Oa ad ¥ RU Cee 
COS SS ab 8 gual by, Js 


tAmazing is the believer, for whatever Allah decrees for him, it 

is better for him! If he is tested with a bounty, he is grateful for 

it and this is better for him; and if he is afflicted with a 

hardship, he is patient with it and this is better for him .»!*! 

Allah has stated that the best tools to help ease the effects 
of the afflictions are patience and prayer. Earlier we mentioned 
Allah’s statement: 


rity vee 26 % be ae ete 8 oye ose 7 ete 
doo aed FNS Gs ASG AS LL > 


¢And seek help in patience and As-Salah (the prayer) and truly, 
it is extremely heavy and hard except for Al-Khashi‘in [i.e., the 
true believers in Allah]> (2:45) 


There are several types of Sabr — patience: one for avoiding 
the prohibitions and sins, one for acts of worship and 
obedience. The second type carries more rewards than the first 


"'] Ahmad 4:438. 
2] Muslim 4 :2292. 


Sdrah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 443 


type. There is a third type of patience required in the face of 
the afflictions and hardships, which is mandatory, like 
repentance. 

‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, “Sabr has two 
parts: patience for the sake of Allah concerning what He is 
pleased with (i.e., acts of worship and obedience), even if it is 
hard on the heart and the body, and patience when avoiding 
what He dislikes, even if it is desired. Those who acquire these 
qualities will be among the patient persons whom Allah shall 
greet (when they meet Him in the Hereafter; refer to Strat Al- 
Ahzab 33:44), Allah willing.”!"! 


The Life enjoyed by Martyrs 


Allah’s statement: 
4205 § SSF St ut go EE A LS > 
¢And say not of those who are killed in the way of Allah, “They are 
dead.” Nay, they are living, indicates that the martyrs are alive 
and receiving their sustenance. 
Muslim reported in his Sahih: 
pe cal Lis dali 3 O33 aE OD dels op sagt cif ob 
Bu dus dest Sh rele GbE dl SE ke at oy oat 
Cage tf dst bs Se thet 85 ot eed Sh thu hs 95 25 
as dé ile os. ose ¥ pel bh; UG dk ote ayy ste ot 
in SSG GAN hg BS Ghee og Joes Gin 0 of 87 
age SUE es By thie Je bn 3,8 - sud or 
(The souls of the martyrs are inside green birds and move about 
in Paradise wherever they wish. Then, they take refuge in 
lamps that are hanging under the Throne (of Allah). Your Lord 
looked at them and asked them, ‘What do you wish for?’ They 
said, ‘What more could we wish for while You have favored us 
with what You have not favored any other of your creation?’ He 
repeated the question again. When they realize thal they will be 
asked (until they answer), they said, ‘We wish that You send 


0] thn Abi Hatim 1:144. 


444 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


us back to the earthly life, so that we fight in Your cause until 

we are killed in Your cause again,’ (because of what they enjoy 

of the rewards of martyrdom). The Lord then said, ‘I have 

written that they will not be returned to it (earthly life) 

again .»!"] 

Imam Ahmad reported that ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Ka‘b bin 
Malik narrated from his father that Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


as pH act OO Gl Gey S Seb Ato GS ob ppl Gc 
‘The believer's soul is a bird that feeds on the trees of Paradise 
until Allah sends it back to its body when the person is 
resurrected .»!?1 
This Hadith includes all the believers in its general meaning. 
Thus, the fact that the Qur’4n mentions the martyrs in 
particular in the above Ayah serves to honor, glorify and favor 


them (although the other believers share the rewards they 
enjoy). 
a SG uses hh 2G OF eh alt cal 
KING boost at Pita a ore 6 ot 8 Bey 
qi yEpali pe BIN 12555 ree ot Cile 
€155. And certainly, We shall test you with something of fear, 
hunger, loss of wealth, lives and fruits, but give glad tidings to 
As-Sabirin (the patient) .> 
4156. Who, when afflicted with calamity, say: ‘Truly, to 
Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall return.” 
4157. They are those on whom are the Salawat (i.e., who are 
blessed and will be forgiven) from their Lord, and (they are 
those who) receive His mercy, and it is they who are the guided 
ones .> 


The Believer is Patient with the Affliction and thus 
gains a Reward 


Allah informs us that He tests and tries His servants, just as 
He said in another Ayah: 


G] Muslim 3:1502. 
{2} Ahmad 3:455. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 445 
C0 FSGS anh Ke ays aS KoG> 
€And surely, We shall try you till We test those who strive 
hard (for the cause of Allah) and As-Sabirin (the patient), and 


We shall test your facts (i.e., the one who is a liar, and the one 
who is truthful).> (47:31) 


Hence, He tests them with the bounty sometimes and 
sometimes with the afflictions of fear and hunger. Allah said 
in another Ayah: 

45 gall HC i USE> 
<So Allah made it taste extreme of hunger (famine) and fear.> 
(16:112) 


The frightened and the hungry persons show the effects of 
the affliction outwardly and this is why Allah has used here 
the word ‘Libds’ (cover or clothes) of fear and hunger. In the 
Ayat above, Allah used the words: 


<erlly oll & phd 
qwith something of fear, hunger,» meaning, a little of each. 
Then (Allah said), 
455:N1 3 all> 
<loss of wealth, > 
meaning, some of the wealth will be destroyed, 
€255> 


¢lives>) meaning, losing friends, relatives and loved ones to 
death, 


45526) 
and fruits,» meaning, the gardens and the farms will not 


produce the usual or expected amounts. This is why Allah said 
next: 


REypist 55> 
«but give glad tidings to As-Sabirin (the patient). > 


He then explained whom He meant by ‘the patient’ whom He 
praised: 


446 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 


Cinires A Oy oH OG Sat Ge Ty eal 
«Who, when afflicted with calamity, say: “Truly, to Allah we 
belong and truly, to Him we shall return."’> 
meaning, those who recite this statement to comfort 
themselves in the face of their loss, know that they belong to 
Allah and that He does what He wills with His servants. They 
also know that nothing and no deed, even if it was the weight 
of an atom, will be lost with Allah on the Day of Resurrection. 
These facts thus compel them to admit that they are Allah’s 
servants and that their return will be to Him in the Hereafter. 
This is why Allah said: 
3 wee coe Moe, , ne AS 
44255 Hs 2 SHS Ge Agile 
<€They are those on whom are the Salawat (i.e., who are blessed 
and will be forgiven) from their Lord, and (they are those who) 
receive His mercy ,> 
meaning, Allah’s praise and mercy will be with them. Sa‘id bin 
Jubayr added, “Meaning, safety from the torment.”!1! 


CEG ch BSshp 
dand it is they who are the guided ones.p ‘Umar bin Al- 
Khattab commented: “What righteous things, and what a 
great heights. 

3 eee og ew Bote ogee AS 
44s HS ot SHS Ge ANd 

€They are those on whom are the Salawat from their Lord, and 
(they are those who) receive His mercy> are the two righteous 
things. 

ij Gi 2 BI> 
and it is they who are the guided ones} are the heights.”!?! 


The heights means more rewards, and these people will be 
awarded their rewards and more. 


(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:158. 
[2] Al-Hakim 2 :270. 


Strah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2 447 


The Virtue of asserting that We all belong to Allah, 
during Afflictions 


There are several Ahddith that mention the rewards of 
admitting that the return is to Allah by saying: 


ges oS 5 fo > 


€‘Truly, to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall 
return .”"> 


when afflictions strike. For instance, Imam Ahmad reported 
that Umm Salamah narrated: Once, Abu Salamah came back 
after he was with Allah’s Messenger # and said: I heard 
Allah’s Messenger 3% recite a statement that made me 
delighted. He said: 


fog 5% 4 3 - Be bp 4g he ae oot e out »y * 
al i Ok Ss cet Be i Gt Gl sl Ll 
wy AS SV a KE J GEL, et 


€No Muslim is struck with an affliction and then says Istirja’ 
when the affliction strikes, and then says: ‘O Allah! Reward me 
for my loss and give me what is better than it,’ but Allah will 
do just that.» 


Umm Salamah said: So I memorized these words. When Abu 
Salamah died I said Isti7ja‘ and said: “O Allah! Compensate me 
for my loss and give me what is better than it.” I then thought 
about it and said, “Who is better than Abu Salamah?” When 
my ‘TIddah (the period of time before the widow or divorced 
woman can remarry) finished, Allah’s Messenger #¢ asked for 
permission to see me while I was dyeing a skin that I had. I 
washed my hands, gave him permission to enter and handed 
him a pillow, and he sat on it. He then asked me for marriage 
and when he finished his speech, I said, “O Messenger of Allah! 
It is not because I do not want you, but I am very jealous and | 
fear that you might experience some wrong mannerism from 
me for which Allah would punish me. I am old and have 
children.” 


He said: 
SN Spe SSS GTS ake Jey Se ul a Ghd shhh ye 2355 G Uh 
«Ste Hee LEB Jul 5, 555 U hy aulel all J ol id 


448 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


tAs for the jealousy that you mentioned, Allah the Exalted will 
remove it from you. As for your being old as you mentioned, I 
have suffered what you have suffered. And for your having 
children, they are my children too.» 


She said, “I have surrendered to Allah’s Messenger.” Allah’s 
Messenger ## married her and Umm Salamah said later, “Allah 
compensated me with who is better than Abu Salamah: Allah’s 
Messenger 3.”'! Muslim reported a shorter version of this 
Hadith.'?! 


cad coo 


Ask ach GO eel Jaci ee 55  & Sih wat yep 

i Ae SG al Sb GE 5 Ky Gis 
4158. Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah"?! are of the symbols of 
Allah. So it is not a sin on him who performs Hajj or ‘Umrah 
(pilgrimage) of the House to perform Tawéf between them. And 


whoever does good voluntarily, then verily, Allah is All- 
Recognizer, All-Knowerp. 


The Meaning of “it is not a sin” in the Ayah 


Imam Ahmad reported that ‘Urwah said that he asked 
‘A’ishah about what Allah stated: 


At 7% a4 


5S SN ae HG Sal Seal GS SS I Ew ally a GD 
ty 

<Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah (two mountains in Makkah) 

are of the symbols of Allah. So it is not a sin on him who 

performs Hajj or ‘Umrah (pilgrimage) of the House (the Ka‘bah 

at Makkah) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them (As-Safa 

and Al-Marwah) .> 

“By Allah! It is not a sin if someone did not perform Tawaf 


around them.” ‘A’ishah said, “Worst is that which you said, O 
my nephew! If this is the meaning of it, it should have read, ‘It 


(1) Ahmad 4:27. 
(21 Muslim 2 :633. 


(31 The names of the two small mountains that the pilgrims walk and 
run between during the rites of ‘Umrah. 


~—— 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagaralt (150 - 174) (Part-2 449 


is not a sin if one did not perform Tawdf around them.’ 
Rather, the Ayah was revealed regarding the Ansar, who 
before Islam, used to assume [hldal (or Ihrdm for Hajj) in the 
area of Mushallal for their idol Manat that they used to 
worship. Those who assumed Jhidal for Manat, used to hesitate 
to perform Tawaf (going) between Mounts As-Safa and Al- 
Marwah. So they (during the Islamic era) asked Allah’s 
Messenger #% about it, saying, ‘O Messenger of Allah! During 
the time of Jahiliyyah, we used to hesitate to perform Tawaf 
between As-Safaé and Al-Marwah.’ Allah then revealed: 


G5 A ale Ch WG Se Fea OS AI AE & Bib wal > 
diy 
<Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah are of the symbols of Allah. 


So it is not a sin on him who performs Hajj or ‘Umrah of the 
House to perform the going (Tawaf) between them .>” 


‘A'ishah then said, “ Allah’s Messenger # has made it the 
Sunnah to perform Tawdf between them (As-Safa and Al- 
Marwah), and thus, no one should abandon performing Tawadf 
between them.”'! This Hadith is reported in the Sahihayn. 

In another narration, Imam Az-Zuhri reported that Urwah 
said: Later on I (Urwah) told Abu Bakr bin ‘Abdur-Rahman 
bin Al-Harith bin Hisham (of ‘A’ishah’s statement) and he said, 
“I have not heard of such information. However, I heard 
learned men saying that all the people, except those whom 
‘A’ishah mentioned, said, ‘Our Tawdf between these two hills 
is a practice of Jadhiliyyah.’ Some others among the Ansar 
said, ‘We were commanded to perform Tawdf of the Ka‘bah, 
but not between As-Safa and Al-Marwah.’ So Allah revealed: 


dai AE o HG Gat Sp 
<Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah are of the symbols of Allah .>” 


Abu Bakr bin ‘Abdur-Rahman then said, “It seems that this 
verse was revealed concerning the two groups.” ! Al-Bukhari 
collected a similar narration by Anas. 

Ash-Shabi said, “Isaf (an idol) was on As-Safa while Na’ilah 


0 Ahmad 6:144. 
7] Fath Al-Bari 3:581, and Muslim 2:929. 


450 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


(an idol) was on Al-Marwah, and they used to touch (or kiss) 
them. After Islam came, they were hesitant about performing 
Tawadf between them. Thereafter, the Ayah (2:158 above) was 
revealed.” 


The Wisdom behind legislating Sa‘ between As-Safa 
and Al-Marwah 


Muslim recorded a long Hadith in his Sahih from Jabir, in 
which Allah’s Messenger #% finished the Tawdf around the 
House, and then went back to the Rukn (pillar, i.e., the Black 
Stone) and kissed it. He then went out from the door near As- 
Safa while reciting: 


43h ES & Sih Gai a> 
€Verily, As-Safa and Al-Marwah are of the symbols of Allah.> 


The Prophet 3 then said, «J start with what Allah has commanded 
me to start with [meaning start the Sa‘t (i.e., fast walking) from the 
As-Safa}). In another narration of An-Nasa’i, the Prophet 
said, ‘Start with what Allah has started with (i.e., As-Safa).s!") 

Imam Ahmad reported that Habibah bint Abu Tajrah said, “I 
saw Allah’s Messenger 3% performing Tawdf between As-Safa 
and Al-Marwah, while the people were in front of him and he 
was behind them walking in Sai. I saw his garment twisted 
around his knees because of the fast walking in Sa‘ (he was 
performing) and he was reciting: 


Api Se 25 I SG ace 
«Perform Sa‘i, for Allah has prescribed Sa‘i on you .»’”! 


This Hadith was used as a proof for the fact that Satis a 
Rukn'®! of Hajj. It was also said that Sat is Wajib,'*! and not 
a Rukn of Hajj and that if one does not perform it by mistake 
or by intention, he could expiate the shortcoming with 


"') Muslim and An-Nasaii 5 :239. 

21 Ahmad 6 :421. 

3} 4 pillar, which if not performed, then the act of worship must be 
repeated. 

4] An obligatory element, which if not performed can be expiated as 
directed. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2 451 


Damm"! Allah has stated that Tawdf between As-Safa and 
Al-Marwah is among the symbols of Allah, meaning, among 
the acts that Allah legislated during the Hajj for Prophet 
Ibrahim. 

Earlier we mentioned the Hadith by Ibn ‘Abbas that the 
origin of Tawaf comes from the Tawaf of Hajar (Prophet 
Ibrahim’s wife), between As-Safa and Al-Marwah seeking water 
for her son (Isma‘il) Ibrahim had left them in Makkah, where 
there was no habitation for her. When Hajar feared that her 
son would die, she stood up and begged Allah for His help and 
kept going back and forth in that blessed area between As- 
Safa and Al-Marwah. She was humble, fearful, frightened and 
meek before Allah. Allah answered her prayers, relieved her of 
her loneliness, ended her dilemma and made the well of 
Zamzam bring forth its water for her, which is: 


rae 213 « pb elie 
tA tasty (or nutritional) food and a remedy for the illness.» 


Therefore, whoever performs Sat between As-Safa and Al- 
Marwah should remember his meekness, humbleness and 
need for Allah to guide his heart, lead his affairs to success 
and forgive his sins. He should also want Allah to eliminate 
his shortcomings and errors and to guide him to the straight 
path. He should ask Allah to keep him firm on this path until 
he meets death, and to change his situation from that of sin 
and errors to that of perfection and being forgiven, — the 
same providence which was provided to Hajar. 

Allah then states: : 

40 G5 45> 


And whoever does good voluntarily. > 


It was said that the Ayah describes performing Tawdf more 
than seven times, it was also said that it refers to voluntary 
‘Umrah or Hajj. It was also said that it means volunteering to 
do good works in general, as Ar-Razi has stated. The third 
opinion was attributed to Al-Hasan Al-Basri.'?) Allah knows 
best. 


[1] A form of expiation in which an animal is slaughtered in Makkah 
and distributed among the poor. 


12) ay-Razi 4:146. 


452 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 

Allah states: 

dhe SE at app 

<...then verily, Allah is All-Recognizer, All-Knower.> 
meaning, Allah’s reward is immense for the little deed, and He 
knows about the sufficiency of the reward. Hence, He will not 
award insufficient rewards to anyone. Indeed: 

GCE GN ES oe BS Gin See OF ys F55 SE su Vt yp 
<€Surely, Allah wrongs not even of the weight of an atom, but 


if there is any good (done), He doubles it, and gives from Him 
a great reward .> (4:40) 


BSN LAST § ol 15 Cas & SHG carl 5. AG 5S Sell Sp 
re HN BBG USS UALS Ue oll Sy Ge Stadt pis it He 
BAG ES phe SHS ds Os WS ly GOLA iB Oh 
Cin gt BG Scat pee BA I ous acl Ath 
€159. Verily, those who conceal the clear proofs, evidences and 
the guidance, which We have sent down, after We have made it 
clear for the People in the Book, they are the ones cursed by 
Allah and cursed by the cursers.> 
€160. Except those who repent and do righteous deeds, and 
openly declare (the truth which they concealed). These, I will 
accept their repentance. And I am the One Who accepts 
repentance, the Most Merciful .> 
€161. Verily, those who disbelieve, and die while they are 
disbelievers, it is they on whom is the curse of Allah and of the 
angels and of mankind, combined .> 
€162. They will abide therein (under the curse in Hell), their 


punishment will neither be lightened nor will they be 
reprieved>. 


The Eternal Curse for Those Who hide Religious 
Commandments 

These Aydt sternly warn against those who hide the clear 
signs that the Messengers were sent with which guide to the 
correct path and beneficial guidance for the hearts, after Allah 


Sitrah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2 453 


has made such aspects clear for His servants through the 
Books that He revealed to His Messengers. Abu Al-‘Aliyah said 
that these Aydt, “were revealed about the People of the 
Scripture who hid the description of Muhammad 3%.”") Allah 
then states that everything curses such people for this evil act. 
Certainly, just as everything asks for forgiveness for the 
scholar, even the fish in the sea and the bird in the air, then 
those who hide knowledge are cursed by Allah and by the 
cursers. 

A Hadith in the Musnad, narrated through several chains of 
narrators, that strengthens the overall judgment of the Hadith, 
states that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah’s Messenger # 
said: 

«Whoever was asked about knowledge that one has, but he hid 
it, then a bridle made of ie will be tied around his mouth on 
the Day of Resurrection .0'?! 

It is also recorded by Al-Bukhari that Abu Hurayrah said, “If 


it was not for an Ayah in Allah’s Book, I would not have 
narrated a Hadith for anyone: 


isis cH ONG pK SS GD 
€Verily, those who conceal the clear proofs, evidences and the 
guidance, which We have sent down,>”*! 
Mujahid said, “When the earth is struck by drought, the 
animals say, This is because of the sinners among the 


Children of Adam. May Allah curse the sinners among the 
Children of Adam.”**! 


Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and Qatddah said that 
KSposh otalh5 > 
qand cursed by the cursers> 
means that the angels and the believers will curse them.!*! 
(1 thn Abi Hatim 1:170. 
[2] Ahmad 2:495. 
{31 Fath ALBari 1:258. 
(41 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:175. 
(SI thn Abi Hatim 1:174. 


454 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Moreover, a Hadith states that everything, including the fish in 
the sea, asks for forgiveness for the scholars. The Ayah (2:159 
above) states that those who hide the knowledge will be 
cursed, (in this life and) on the Day of Resurrection, by Allah, 
the angels, all humanity, and those who curse (including the 
animals) each in its own distinct way. Allah knows best. 

From this punishment, Allah excluded all who repent to 
Him: 

435 (ALG Ue gall > 


<Except those who repent and do righteous deeds, and openly 
declare (the truth which they concealed). > 


This Ayah refers to those who regret what they have been 
doing and correct their behavior and, thus, explain to the 
people what they have been hiding. 

qt Sit Oy Fle LH! Ailey 
<These, I will accept their repentance. And I am the One Who 
accepts repentance, the Most Merciful. > 

This Ayah also indicates that those who used to call to 
innovation, or even disbelief, and repent to Allah, then Allah 
will forgive them. Allah afterwards states that those who 
disbelieve in Him and remain in this state until they die, then: 


403 Sad C0 Gl OG KAS LK ES ge GSp 


it is they on whom is the curse of Allah and of the angels and 
of mankind, combined. They will abide therein (under the curse 
in Hell). > 


Therefore, they will suffer the eternal curse until the Day of 
Resurrection and after that in the fire of Jahannam, where, 


Cert pe LES ap 


<their punishment a neither be lightened> 
Hence, the torment will not be decreased for them, 
ight £ GD 
<nor will they be reprieved. > 


The torment will not be changed or tempered for even an 
hour. Rather, it is continuous and eternal. We seek refuge 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2 455 
with Allah from this evil end. 


Cursing the Disbelievers is allowed 


There is no disagreement that it is lawful to curse the 
disbelievers. ‘Umar bin Al-Khattaéb and the Imams after him 
used to curse the disbelievers in their Qundt (a type of 
supplication) during the prayer and otherwise. As for cursing a 
specific disbeliever, some scholars stated that it is not allowed 
to curse him, because we do not know how Allah will make 
his end. Others said that it is allowed to curse individual 
disbelievers. For proof, they mention the story about the man 
who was brought to be punished repeatedly for drinking 
(alcohol), a man said, “May Allah curse him! He is being 
brought repeatedly (to be flogged for drinking).” Allah’s 
Messenger 2% said: 


234255 Gt Cod Og Sali Ye 
‘Do not curse him, for he loves Allah and His Messenger»,'"| 


This Hadith indicates that it is allowed to curse those who 
do not love Allah and His Messenger #. Allah knows best. 


Eo tebt Saat AT SV Es th Keys> 
€163. And your Ilah (God) is One Ilah (God — Allah), La 
ilaha illa Huwa (there is none who has the right to be 
worshipped but He), the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.> 

In this Ayah, Allah mentions that He is the only deity, and 
that He has no partners or equals. He is Allah, the One and 
Only, the Sustainer, and there is no deity worthy of worship 
except Him. He is the Most Gracious — Ar-Rahmadn, the Most 
Merciful — Ar-Rahim. We explained the meanings of these two 
Names in the beginning of Surat Al-Fatihah. Shahr bin 


Hawshab_ reported that Asma’ bint Yazid bin As-Sakan 
narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 


EM 56 3 beVi at on 
«Allah’s Greatest Name is contained in these two Ayato: 
du sel at AY SV Es Kehod 


'') Abdur-Razzaq 7 :381, similar with Al-Bukhari, no. 6780. 


456 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


ry By he Yo Abang €And your Ilah (God) is 
ie Fi Od td are -, One Tlah (God = Al- 
e sfos | \ o “2 

dash eibe NSE SL | tay, La aha illa Huon 


Sees aa, Fal 36,4 Setali5 || (there is none who has 
; the right to be wor- 
shipped but He), the 


iz: 
IGE (% 

> 
os 


arid 


Esse Are Aix abt, ito ie 


ABS hart ae Most Gracious, the 

See a 
(ek ae 

cgi frat 


- 


Most pine las ve and: 


es 427 
tn 


¢Alif-Lam-Min.. Allah! 
La ilahd illa Huwa (none 
has the right to be wor- 
shipped but He), Al- 
2 Hatyul-Qaiyam (the 
6222, 45555 SJ_|| Ever Living, the One 
ie aa Who sustains and pro- 
wy 55 ghcel tects all that exists) .> 
ETA 3:1, 2)" 
Si vy 2 ( , 
a eras ite then Allah 
FURR eA mentions some of the 
K Po tani ee proof that He is alone 
pet enes rere) as the deity, that He 
is the One who 
created the heavens and the earth and all of the various 
creatures between them, all of which testify to His Oneness. 
Allah said: 
ey ANS 62 SM iG 5 yo Git UNG occat gi g Ap 
Se on 5 GF Ng GE Ey Lal & A Ot ee 
Woks yd pW CNG Kai ye Sait Leas ool a 55 8 
€164. Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and 
in the alternation of night and day, and the ships which sail 


through the sea with that which is of use to mankind, and the 
water (rain) which Allah sends down from the sky and makes 


(0) Abu Dawud 2:168. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 457 


the earth alive therewith after its death, and the moving (living) 
creatures of all kinds that He has scattered therein, and in the 
veering of winds and clouds which are held between the sky and 
the earth, are indeed Ayat (proofs, evidences, signs, etc.) for 
people of understanding .> 


The Proofs for Tawhid 
Allah said: 
4G oi gE a GY 
Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth... > 
Therefore, the sky, with its height, intricate design, vastness, 
the heavenly objects in orbit, and this earth, with its density, 
its lowlands, mountains, seas, deserts, valleys, and other 
structures, and beneficial things that it has. Allah continues: 
485 JS thy 
€...and in the alternation of night and day.> 
This (the night) comes and then goes followed by the other 
(the day) which does not delay for even an instant, just as 
Allah said: 
42555 oh a BOG BC MWY CHAOS IT CS Aa yp 
lt is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the night 
outstrip the day. They all float, each in an orbit.» (36:40) 
Sometimes, the day grows shorter and the night longer, and 
sometimes vice versa, one takes from the length of the other. 
Similarly Allah said: 
455i 3 SG Bass seal g SN asp 
<Allah merges the night into the day, and He merges the day 
into the night} (57:6) 
meaning, He extends the length of one from the other and vice 
versa. Allah then continues: 
4H i pol a GH gh wilit> 
<...and the ships which sail through the sea with that which is 
of use to mankind,> 
Shaping the sea in this manner, so that it is able to carry 


458 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


ships from one shore to another, so people benefit from what 


the other region has, and export what they have to them and 
vice versa. 


Allah then continues: 
465 55 BM 4 GE OE Lai & Ht NH > 


...and the water (rain) which Allah sends down from the sky 
and makes the earth alive therewith after its death>, which is 
similar to Allah’s statement: 


€And a sign for them is the dead land. We give it life, and We 


bring forth from it grains, so that they eat thereof.> (36:33), 
until: 


4b fa Y 5p 
¢which they know not.> (36:36) 
Allah continues: 


4255 Je= x ta &5> 


¢and the moving (living) creatures of all kinds that He has 
scattered therein,> 


meaning, in various shapes, colors, uses and sizes, whether 
small or large. Allah knows all that, sustains it, and nothing is 
concealed from Him. Similarly, Allah said: 


€ 


4 o¢ aS ycgeetete oslo awe ett te ae he. cee oe 
dang gis a FES WES A GY ANT gg 0 o> 


€And no moving (living) creature is there on earth but its 
provision is due from Allah. And He knows its dwelling place 
and its deposit (in the uterus or grave). All is in a Clear Book 
(Al-Lawh Al-Mahftiz — the Book of Decrees with Allah).> 
(11:6) 


€oipi e55> 


¢...and in the veering of winds... > 


Sometimes, the wind brings mercy and sometimes torment. 
Sometimes it brings the good news of the clouds that follow it, 
sometimes it leads the clouds, herding them, scattering them 
or directing them. Sometimes, the wind comes from the north 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 459 


(the northern wind), and sometimes from the south, sometimes 
from the east, and striking the front of the Ka‘bah, sometimes 
from the west, striking its back. There are many books about 
the wind rain, stars and the regulations related to them, but 
here is not the place to elaborate on that, and Allah knows 
best. 

Allah continues: 


456 cai Sait Guay 
¢...and clouds which are held between the sky and the earth, > 


The clouds run between the sky and the earth to wherever 
Allah wills of lands and areas. 
Allah said next: 


€asas pd pd> 
¢...are indeed Ayat for people of understanding, > 


meaning, all these things are clear signs that testify to Allah’s 
Oneness. Similarly, Allah said: 


vo he i hee Be ke ate 8 tee oh ee ee ee re 
Sai oe CONT GY oh 0 sal it SG o3cti gb a 21> 
ee ye ete eh eet te IG tte tee FF PBr ere oF red 
ERE GE YY SS GE g oy, tay ree BS Vay OSS cant 59S 
4202 0 oe GS Gt SLE is 


<Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the 
alternation of night and day, there are indeed signs for men of 
understanding. Those who remember Allah (always, and in 
prayers) standing, sitting, and lying down on their sides, and 
think deeply about the creation of the heavens and the earth, 
(saying): “Our Lord! You have not created (all) this without 
purpose, glory to You! (Exalted are You above all that they 
associate with You as partners). Give us salvation from the 
torment of the Fire.’’> (3:190, 191) 


- fe, Mee ey a e rad y 
th ach FOES ere ae canes oe 


56 VA ty ss “151 i ack ere Le edt Goi 5 
’ st s ° “37% 27 2 8g it - & 
cancel “if tyes GET & |y ote ee a0 5s { iit 


460 Tafsir _Ibn_ Kathir 


€165. And of mankind are some who take (for worship) others 
besides Allah as rivals (to Allah). They love them as they love 
Allah. But those who believe, love Allah more (than anything 
else). If only, those who do wrong could see, when they will see 
the torment, that all power belongs to Allah and that Allah is 
severe in punishment .> 


4166. When those who were followed disown (declare 
themselves innocent of) those who followed (them), and they see 
the torment, then all their relations will be cut off from them. 


167. And those who followed will say: “If only we had one 
more chance to return (to the worldly life), we would disown 
(declare ourselves as innocent from) them as they have disowned 
(declared themselves as innocent from) us.” Thus Allah will 
show them their deeds as regrets for them. And they will never 
get out of the Fire.> 


The Condition of the Polytheists in this Life and the 
Hereafter 


In these Aydt, Allah mentions the condition of the polytheists 
in this life and their destination in the Hereafter. They 
appointed equals and rivals with Allah, worshipping them 
along with Allah and loving them, just as they love Allah. 
However, Allah is the only deity worthy of worship, Who has 
neither rival nor opponent nor partner. It is reported in the 
Sahihayn that ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘td said: I said, “O 
Messenger of Allah! What is the greatest sin?” He said: 


‘To appoint a rival to Allah while He Alone has created 
you .»!7] 
Allah said: 
RCE ORT 
<But those who believe, love Allah more (than anything else)» 


Because these believers love Allah, know His greatness, 
revere Him, believe in His Oneness, then they do not associate 


0] Fath ALBari 8:3 and Muslim 1:90. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 461 


anything or anyone with Him in the worship. Rather, they 
worship Him Alone, depend on Him and they seek help from 
Him for each and every need. 

Then, Allah warns those who commit Shirk, 


hick & BH cut a5 9 Eg Sg > 


<If only, those who do wrong could see, when they will see the 
torment, that all power belongs to Allah.> 
if these people knew what they will face and the terrible 
punishment they are to suffer because of their disbelief and 
Shirk (polytheism), then they would shun the deviation that 
they live by. 

Allah mentions their false beliefs in their idols, and that 
those they followed will declare their innocence of them. Allah 
said: 

CS Sh & adh obi Oy 
«When those who were followed disown (declare themselves 
innocent of) those who followed (them).> 
the angels, whom they used to claim that they worshipped, 
declare their innocence of them in the Hereafter, saying: 
Kyte 6 GK o chy UE 
We declare our innocence (from them) before You. It was not 
us they worshipped .> (28:63), and: 
4S op, BAL Soll its BEF pd on CS Cf GERD 
<“Glorified be You! You are our Wali (Lord) instead of them. 
Nay, but they used to worship the Jinn; most of them were 
believers in them.”’> (34:4) 

The Jinn will also disown the disbelievers who worshipped 
them, and they will reject that worship. Allah said: 

He 6 BET AA EY oH Boh BE LN ad 

CTS pele, HG AN AWC Gai Ht Oy hs 
And who is more astray than one who calls on (invokes) 
besides Allah, such as will not answer him till the Day of 


Resurrection, and who are (even) unaware of their calls 
(invocations) to them? And when mankind are gathered (on the 


46200 Tafsir Ton Kathir 


Day of Resurrection), they (false deities) will become their 
enemies and will deny their worshipping.» (46:5, 6) Allah 
said: 


pile BSS age BY SE ne AST Laan if a oe LGD 
Cabs 


¢And they have taken (for worship) dlihah (gods) besides Allah, 
that they might give them honor, power and glory (and also 
protect them from Allah’ punishment). Nay, but they (the so- 
called gods) will deny their worship of them, and become 
opponents to them (on the Day of Resurrection).> (19:81, 82) 
Prophet Ibrahim said to his people: 


AR Sal 3p 3 GAT BA b RG Hs af of of FART yp 
hapa of peed U5 Sith Kul es (ade 205 et, pe 
€You have taken (for worship) idols instead of Allah. The love 
between you is only in the life of this world, but on the Day of 
Resurrection, you shall disown each other, and curse each 
other, and your abode will be the Fire, and you shall have no 
helper .> (29:25) Allah said: 
SA5 Sal Lat Sy MEY BF Bo Le SASS Seu a D> 
fat WE Sal Jb Ocnk DH AY User ob Ye al 
ial J Bink 2 & SE yD ati g Kim 3A 
A Saks ail AS I EAE YG oh Gb ES Shy eae 
S52 SYS Sail s6l 3 GON cs Cut OF OF nat UH tad 
CESS OF UY) 
<But if you could see when the Zalimin (polytheists and 
wrongdoers) will be made to stand before their Lord, how they 
will cast the (blaming) word one to another! Those who were 
deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: “Had it not 
been for you, we should certainly have Been believers!” And 
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed 
weak: “Did we keep you back from guidance after it had come 
to you? Nay, but you were Mujrimin (polytheists, sinners, 
disbelievers, criminals).”’ Those who were deemed weak will say 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 463 


to those who were arrogant: ‘Nay, but it was your plotting by 
night and day, when you ordered us to disbelieve in Allah and 
set up rivals to Him!” And each of them (parties) will conceal 
their own regrets (for disobeying Allah during this worldly life), 
when they behold the torment. And We shall put iron collars 
round the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they requited 
aught except what they used to do?> (34:31-33) Allah said: 


5k Uy ecu SG Kise Gil a5 veies il ay EM G8 OS LEN 35> 
SU ACU Bis ate Se BIS at cra) 
Ee OS Salt 3 1S & od & See ht et, 3 tC) ae, 


¢And Shaytan (Satan) will say when the matter has been 
decided : ‘Verily, Allah promised you a promise of truth. And I 
too promised you, but I betrayed you. I had no authority over 
you except that I called you, and you responded to me. So 
blame me not, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can 
you help me. I deny your former act in associating me (Satan) 
as a partner with Allah (by obeying me in the life of the world). 
Verily, there is a painful torment for the Zalimin (polytheists 
and wrongdoers) .> (14:22) 


Allah then said: 
CENT py SAG Cidcl > 
<...and they see the torment, then all their relations will be cut 


off from them .> 


meaning, when they see Allah’s torment, their power and 
means of salvation are all cut off, and they will have no way of 
making amends, nor will they find a way of escape from the 
Fire. ‘Ata’ reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said about: 


E45 ty, caliis> 
<then all their relations will be cut off from them.) 


” 


“meaning the friendship.” Mujahid reported a similar 
statement in another narration by Ibn Abu Najih.!"! 


(1) At-Tabari 3 :290. 


464 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Allah said: 
46 US pte CES OS ot 5H tt 3D 
<And those who followed will say: “If only we had one more 
chance to return (to the worldly life), we would disown (declare 


ourselves as innocent from) them as they have disowned 
(declared themselves as innocent from) us.”’> 


This Ayah means: ‘If we only had a chance to go back to 
the life so that we could disown them (their idols, leaders, etc.) 
shun their worship, ignore them and worship Allah Alone 
instead.’ But they utter a lie in this regard, because if they 
were given the chance to go back, they would only return to 
what they were prohibited from doing, just as Allah said. This 
is why Allah said: 


digo oi pice Hl Lyk Sy 
€Thus Allah will show them their deeds as regrets for them. > 


meaning, their works will vanish and disappear. Similarly, 
Allah said: 
RAS Ace LS ce By Le BD 
¢And We shall turn to whatever deeds they (disbelievers, 
polytheists, sinners) did, and We shall make such deeds as 
scattered floating particles of dust.» (25:23) 


Allah also said: 
Ket a Gl 4 SH US He Ag, Wi ual Jeep 
<The parable of those who disbelieved in their Lord is that their 


works are as ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a 
stormy day.> (14:18), and: 


emgee 


deb gent 28 ge ST oa fie suigp 


As for those who disbelieved, their deeds are like a mirage in a 
desert. The thirsty one thinks it to be water.> (24:39) 


This is why Allah said — at the end of the Ayah 2:167 above 
AA Se Sap shy oh Cd 
¢And they will never get out of the Fire.> 


Sarah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2 465 


528 SS Hy YE Gh AS IF Cp IE ONT g 1 AGT ele> 
405255 Yo At BOS ob Koay Say Ket ay mee 


€168. O mankind! Eat of that which is lawful and good on the 
earth, and follow not the footsteps of Shaytan (Satan). Verily, 
he is to you an open enemy .> 


€169. He (Satan) commands you only what is evil and Fahsha’ 
(sinful), and that you should say about Allah what you know 
not .> 


The Order to eat the Lawful Things, and the Prohibition 
of following the Footsteps of Shaytan 


After Allah stated that there is no deity worthy of worship 
except Him and that He Alone created the creation, He stated 
that He is the Sustainer for all His creation, and He mentioned 
a favor that He granted them; He has allowed them to eat any 
of the pure lawful things on the earth that do not cause harm 
to the body or the mind. He also forbade them from following 
the footsteps of Shaytadn, meaning his ways and methods with 
which he misguides his followers, like prohibiting the Bahirah 
(a she-camel whose milk was spared for the idols and nobody 
was allowed to milk it), or Sd’ibah (a she-camel let loose for 
free pasture for the idols and nothing was allowed to be 
carried on it), or a Wasilah (a she-camel set free for idols 
because it has given birth to a she-camel at its first delivery 
and then again gives birth to a she-camel at its second 
delivery), and all of the other things that Shaytadn made 
attractive to them during the time of Jdhiliyyah. Muslim 
recorded ‘yad bin Himar saying that Allah’s Messenger #% said 
that Allah the Exalted says, 

LBS Hy - 435 - ONE GB alle EAE Ju 3S Sy: us a 5,8 

oe 
«Every type of wealth I have endowed My servants is allowed 
for them...’ (until), ‘I have created My servants Hunafa’ (pure 
or upright), but the devils came to them and led them astray 
from their (true) religion and prohibited them from what I 


466 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
allowed for them ,’s!"| 
Allah said: 
bp He SI Ap 
¢...he is to you an open enemy .> 
warning against Satan. Allah said in another instance: 


CE l ON Se KS ie ER Ue DEE SS hc Ap 
<Surely, Shaytdn is an enemy to you, so take (treat) him as an 
enemy. He only invites his Hizb (followers) that they may 
become the dwellers of the blazing Fire.» (35:6), and: 


46 aeuln iy He KS 05 ih on HAN ASS Hosp 
<Will you then take him (Iblis) and his offspring as protectors 
and helpers rather than Me while they are enemies to you? 
What an evil is the exchange for the Zalimin (polytheists, and 
wrongdoers, etc).> (18:50) 


Qatadah and As-Suddi commented on what Allah said: 
<i stk 1A sd 
¢...and follow not the footsteps of Shaytan (Satan)>: 
Every act of disobedience to Allah is among the footsteps of 
Satan. |?! 
‘Abd bin Humayd reported that Ibn ‘Abb&s said: “Any vow 
or oath that one makes while angry, is among the footsteps of 


Shaytan and its expiation is that of the vow.” ©! Allah’s 
statement: 


CG Vo A KK ob Kees oh kD 
¢<He (Satan) commands you only what is evil and Fahsha 
(sinful), and that you should say about Allah what you know 
not.> 


The verse means: ‘Your enemy, Satan, commands you to 
commit evil acts and what is worse than that, such as 


(') Muslim 4 :2197. 

21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:211. 

(3) Feeding ten poor persons, clothing them, freeing a servant, or 
fasting three days; and refer to 5:89 in the Qur’an. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 467 


adultery and so forth. 
He commands you to 

oad commit what is even 
Wes aa SN aj = 3\2 || worse, that is, saying 
s dim ¢ . || about Allah without 
knowledge.’ So this 


Z Aeottag 246 the BEE Sr. <2 . : 
Slaay 245 eS ; Jincludes every 
innovator and 


ect tage wee ad {4- < an. ; z 

PSS reat eel a bo : RY || disbeliever. 

cts \7t, ey DS *o uc 02S oy 5 5h VA Te [28 of fe 

AOS Sy SA Be AIG | OSG Aa ot Ja ap 
z Ave ee ee Toe ae “es PP eat a oo ee hee te 

es Salles pysdicod 5 pall at ai cease a NCE Lie a 


{ 


be 
att tgerneat yeagenyooe ap st tere lg ste, ce £4 bee 
alo ace il Wesley y GA ne lal cpo8 ail pal Y aston Ra) Se rie 

$94 Ge gd e a Bes é» Z sya ceil BS ee Ge seg Baw 
SPAN GSS NG, OP Aeiae | wae YC Silas 

Ihe wre eses Sl err ee ae te fers ote base 
SPU AMNW Betas ry ALS keel ff val GES Gee Gali 5 

i a + Ca CS TN ee 
PSs PP ISTE BeAr eG 5 se 4333 4 \  ? 
eral gletyssBiviig keg | Me Wea YG oe 


oe 4 7d Bos $4 (Bs 

NAO Woe ams | ee 

seaiclh rialG essai ait ee 

; <b 4t 1 2e \4 4170. When it is said to 

bie eg them: “Follow what Al- 

lah has sent down.” 

They say: ‘Nay! We 

shall follow what we 

found our fathers following.” (Would they do that!) even though their 
fathers did not understand anything nor were they guided?) 

€171. And the example of those who disbelieve is as that of him who 


shouts to those (flock of sheep) that hear nothing but calls and cries. 
(They are) deaf, dumb and blind. So they do not understand .> 


The Polytheist imitates Other Polytheists 


Allah states that if the disbelievers and polytheists are called 
to follow what Allah has revealed to His Messenger 3% and 
abandon the practices of misguidance and ignorance that they 
indulge in, they will say, “Rather. We shall follow what we 
found our fathers following,” meaning, worshipping the idols 
and the false deities. Allah criticized their reasoning: 


468 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
€pa3ter E sip 


<(Would they do that!) even though their fathers>, 


meaning, those whom they follow and whose practices they 
imitate, and: 
c eave Yet Laps I> 
<...did not understand anything nor were they guided?> 

meaning, they had no sound understanding or guidance. Ibn 
Ishaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that this was revealed 
about a group of Jews whom Allah’s Messenger #% called to 
Islam, but they refused, saying, “Rather, we shall follow what 


we found our forefathers following.” So Allah revealed this Ayah 
(2:170) above."!#! 


The Disbeliever is just like an Animal 


Allah then made a parable of the disbelievers, just as He 
said in another Ayah: 


<i JE 3 SRY Sult> 
¢For those who believe not in the Hereafter is an evil 
description .> (16:60) 


Similarly, Allah said here (2:171 above) 
die os Se5> 
¢And the example of those who disbelieve... > 

meaning, in their injustice, misguidance and ignorance, they 
are just like wandering animals, not understanding what they 
are told; if the shepherd heralds them or calls them to what 
benefits them, they would not understand what is actually 
being said to them, for they only hear unintelligible sounds. 
This is what is reported from Ibn ‘Abbas, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, 
Mujahid, ‘Ikrimah, ‘Ata’, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, ‘Ata’ Al- 
Khurasani and Ar-Rabi' bin Anas.!! 


452 Bd 


(1 At-Tabari 3:305. 
(21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :225-228. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 469 


«They are deaf, dumb, and blind.> 


means, they are deaf, as they do not hear the truth; mute, as 
they do not utter it; and blind, as they do not see or recognize 
its path and way. 


iis 48> 
<So they do not understand .> 
means, they do not ene or understand anything. 


3 Bee yb WEG SHG Geet ow Whee tin all ep 
ga a BS oy i035 Pl) rs eal, acl peels Ce NS 

455 5 Spe at §y ae al MK YS HS He Est 
€172. O you who believe (in the Oneness of Allah — Islamic 
Monotheism)! Eat of the lawful things that We have provided 
you with, and be grateful to Allah, if it is indeed He Whom 
you worship. 


€173. He has forbidden you only the Maitah (dead animals), 
and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is slaughtered 
as a sacrifice for other than Allah. But if one is forced by 
necessity without willful disobedience nor transgressing due 
limits, then there is no sin on him. Truly, Allah is Oft- 
Forgiving, Most Merciful .> 


The Command to eat Pure Things and the Explanation 
of the Prohibited Things 


Allah commands His believing servants to eat from the pure 
things that He has created for them and to thank Him for it, if 
they are truly His servants. Eating from pure sources is a 
cause for the acceptance of supplications and acts of worship, 
just as eating from impure sources prevents the acceptance of 
supplications and acts of worship, as mentioned in a Hadith 
recorded by Imam Ahmad, that Abu Hurayrah said that 
Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 


a A Gy Saehali af an yy ch Vy Soe Yeh a 4 rao tghs 
ss KG i Cys = si oH EN CRD 25 east 
GEN 353 6b GREG & cod o- Wide Uae Spl Glad : ds Gas 


470 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
BS Cakss 5G S5 Ge ds a ef Gad pn je 
cei SE YE psy gies ts ily ps Sky 


tO people! Allah is Tayyib (Pure and Good) and only accepts 
that which is Tayyib. Allah has indeed commanded the believers 
with what He has commanded the Messengers, for He said: €O 
(you) Messengers! Eat of the Tayyibat and do righteous deeds. 
Verily, I am well-acquainted with what you do} (23:51), and: 
<O you who believe! Eat of the lawful things that We have 
provided you with> He then mentioned a man, ‘who is 
engaged in a long journey, whose hair is untidy and who is 
covered in dust, he raises his hands to the sky, and says, ‘O 
Lord! O Lord!’ Yet, his food is from the unlawful, his drink is 
from the unlawful, his clothes are from the unlawful, and he 
was nourished by the unlawful, so how can it (his supplication) 
be accepted?”’»!"! It was also recorded by Muslim and At- 
Tirmidhi |?! 

After Allah mentioned how He has blessed His creatures by 
providing them with provisions, and after commanding them to 
eat from the pure things that He has provided them, He then 
stated that He has not prohibited anything for them, except 
dead animals. Dead animals are those that die before being 
slaughtered; whether they die by strangling, a violent blow, a 
headlong fall, the goring of horns or by being partly eaten by a 
wild animal. Dead animals of the sea are excluded from this 
ruling, as is explained later, Allah willing, as Allah said: 


dicts Zi ko Si Selb 
<Lawful to you is (the pursuit of) watergame and its use for 
food> (5:96), 
and because of the Hadith about the whale recorded in the 
Sahih.'5| The Musnad, Al-Muwatta’ and the Sunan recorded 
the Prophet #% saying about the sea: 


toe 3 s 
2s Joly hu 5 tba ho 


1] Anmad 3:328. 
[21 Muslim 2:703, Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 8 :333. 
13! Fath Al-Bari 6:152. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 471 


«Its water is pure and its dead are permissible 0!" 


Ash-Shafii, Ahmad, Ibn Majah, and Ad-Daraqutni reported 
that Ibn ‘Umar said that the Prophet 3% said: 


aStabny LSiy sigcdiy Gen cosy obs del 


tWe have been allowed two dead things and two bloody things: 
fish and locusts; and liver and spleen»,|?! 


We will mention this subject again in Surat Al-Md’idah 
(chapter 5S in the Qur’an), In sha’ Allah (if Allah wills). 


Issue: According to Ash-Shafif and other scholars, milk and 
eggs that are inside dead unslaughtered animals are not pure, 
because they are part of the dead animal. In one narration 
from him, Malik said that they are pure themselves, but 
become impure because of their location. Similarly, there is a 
difference of opinion over the cheeses (made with the milk) of 
dead animals. The popular view of the scholars is that it is 
impure, although they mentioned the fact that the 
Companions ate from the cheeses made by the Magians (fire 
worshippers). Hence, Al-Qurtubi commented: “Since only a 
small part of the dead animal is mixed with it, then it is 
permissible, because a minute amount of impurity does not 
matter if it is mixed with a large amount of liquid.”*) Ibn 
Majah reported that Salman said that Allah’s Messenger 2% 
was asked about butter, cheese and fur. He said: 


29s 


Hib Es Key alls Bt GSU Gal eytis pt Jet w dsicin 


‘The allowed is what Allah has allowed in His Book and the 
prohibited is what Allah has prohibited in His Book. What He 
has not mentioned is a part of what He has pardoned .»!*\ 


Allah has prohibited eating the meat of swine, whether 


(l Ahmad 5:365, Al-Muwatta’ 1:22, Abu Dawid 1:64, Tuhfat Al 
Ahwadhi 1: 224, An-Nasaii 1:50, and Ibn Majah 1:136. 

1 Tartib Musnad Ash-Shéfii 2:173, Ahmad 2:97, Ibn Majah 2:1073, 
Ad-Daraqutni 4 :272. 

(3) Al-Qurtubi 2:221. 

(41 fbn Majah 2:1117. 


472 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


slaughtered or not, and this includes its fat, either because it 
is implied, or because the term Lahm includes that, or by 
analogy. Similarly prohibited are offerings to other than Allah, 
that is what was slaughtered in a name other than His, be it 
for monuments, idols, divination, or the other practices of the 
time of JGhiliyyah. Al-Qurtubi mentioned that ‘A’ishah was 
asked about what non-Muslims slaughter for their feasts and 
then offer some of it as gifts for Muslims. She said, “Do not 
eat from what has been slaughtered for that day, (or feast) but 
eat from their vegetables." 


The Prohibited is Allowed in Cases of Emergency 


Then Allah permitted eating these things when needed for 
survival or when there are no permissible types of food 
available. Allah said: 


G36 V5 BG Zo Skat yp 
€But if one is forced by necessity without willful disobedience 
nor transgressing due limits>, 
meaning, without transgression or overstepping the limits, 


4256 (Sy Sé> 
4...then there is no sin on him.> 
meaning, if one eats such items, for, 


€h5 She ail > 
€Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.» 


Mujahid said, “If one is forced by necessity without willful 
disobedience nor transgressing the set limits. For example, if 
he didn’t, then he would have to resort to highway robbery, 
rising against the rulers, or some other kinds of disobedience 
to Allah, then the permission applies to him. If one does so 
transgressing the limits, or continually, or out of disobedience 
to Allah, then the permission does not apply to him even if he 
is in dire need.” The same was reported from Said bin Jubayr. 
Said and Muqatil bin Hayyan are reported to have said that 
without willful disobedience means, “Without believing that it 


(1 Al-Qurtubi 2 :224. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (150 - 174) (Part-2) 473 


is permissible.” It was reported that Ibn ‘Abbas commented 
on the Ayah: 


432 5 YS Zep 
€...without willful disobedience nor transgressing> 


saying, “Without willful disobedience means eating the dead 
animal and not continuing to do so. Qatadah said: 
€u5 Zed 

<without willful disobediencey “Without transgressing by eating 
from the dead animals, that is when the lawful is available.”!?! 

Issue: When one in dire straits finds both — dead animals, 
and foods belong to other people which he could get without 
risking the loss of his hands or causing harm, then it is not 
allowed for him to eat the dead animals. Ibn Majah reported 
that ‘Abbad bin Shurahbil Al-Ghubari said, “One year we 
suffered from famine. I came to Al-Madinah and entered a 
garden. I took some grain that I cleaned, and ate, then I left 
some of it in my garment. The owner of the garden came, 
roughed me up and took possession of my garment. I then 


went to Allah’s Messenger # and told him what had happened. 
He said to the man: 


ail} 35 cya slate 56 4 eke V5 - ee gf - wae Swf Ech 
525 hat NH lth fy gy Spl 3 

"You have not fed him when he was hungry - or he said 

starving - nor have you taught him if he was ignorant.» 


The Prophet # commanded him to return ‘Abbad’s garment 
to him, and to offer him a Wasq (around 180 kilograms) - or a 
half Wasg - of food!*! 

This has a sufficiently strong chain of narrators and there 
are many other witnessing narrations to support it, such as 
the Hadith that ‘Amr bin Shu‘ayb narrated from his father 
that his grandfather said: Allah’s Messenger # was asked 
about the hanging clusters of dates. He said: 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:236. 
7] At-Tabari 3 :324. 
(3! ton Majah 2:770. 


474 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Whe i436 BE Be EE bY Olof to 


«There is no harm for whoever takes some of it in his mouth for 
a necessity without putting it in his garment. oft) 


Muagatil bin Hayyan commented on: 
thas Sib a Me a, 


€...then there is no sin on him. Truly, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful .> 


“For what is eaten out of necessity.”!7! Sa‘id bin Jubayr said, 
“Allah is pardoning for what has been eaten of the unlawful, 
and Merciful’ in that He allowed the prohibited during times of 
necessity.”5!_ Masraq said, “Whoever is in dire need, but does 
not eat or drink until he dies, he will enter the Fire.”"! This 
indicates that eating dead animals for those who are in need 
of it for survival is not only permissible but required. 


oS c Add LG Eg GG Seal & TEAC AS Zi yp 
i) piu Me bi’ % seg ae al W5 nui he, ba 3 


43500 as nds dosh 4 Dia 5 ‘ll Seif sag 14s 


4174. Verily, those who conceal what Allah has sent down of 
the Book, and purchase a small gain therewith (of worldly 
things), they eat into their bellies nothing but fire. Allah will 
not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor purify them, 
and theirs will be a painful torment. 

4175. Those are they who have purchased error at the price of 
guidance, and torment at the price of forgiveness. So how bold 
they are (for evil deeds which will push them) to the Fire>. 


4176. That is because Allah has sent down the Book (the 
Qur'an) in truth. And verily, those who disputed as regards 
the Book are far away in opposition>. 


(! Tunfat ALAhwadhi 4:510. 

2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:240. 

31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:240. 

41 Al-Bayhaqi in As-Sunan Al-Kubra 9 :357. 


1 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 475 
Criticizing the Jews for concealing what Allah revealed 
Allah said: 
toSeoll & Hl IAG 2S elt gp 


<Verily, those who conceal what Allah has sent down of the 
Book.> 


Meaning the Jews who concealed their Book’s descriptions of 
Muhammad 3, all of which testify to his truth as a Messenger 
and a Prophet. They concealed this information so that they 
would not lose authority and the position that they had with 
the Arabs, where they would bring them gifts, and honor them. 
The cursed Jews feared that if they announced what they know 
about Muhammad 32%, then the people would abandon them 
and follow him. So they hid the truth so that they may retain 
the little that they were getting, and they sold their souls for 
this little profit. They preferred the little that they gained over 
guidance and following the truth, believing in the Messenger 2 
and having faith in what Allah was sent him with. Therefore, 
they have profited failure and loss in this life and the Hereafter. 

As for this world, Allah made the truth about His Messenger 
# known anyway, by the clear signs and the unequivocal 
proofs. Thereafter, those whom the Jews feared would follow 
the Prophet 3s, believed in him and followed him anyway, and 
so they became his supporters against them. Thus, the Jews 
earned anger on top of the wrath that they already had earned 
before, and Allah criticized them again many times in His Book. 
For instance, Allah said in this Ayah (2:174 above): 

ChE oy DG Seal & HINGES AK gp 
«Verily, those who conceal what Allah has sent down of the 
Book, and purchase a small gain therewith (of worldly things).> 


meaning, the joys and delights of this earthly life. Allah said: 
E551 Wy spt 3g SKE AgI> 

...they eat into their bellies nothing but firr.> meaning, 

whatever they eat in return for hiding the truth, will turn 


into a raging fire in their stomachs on the Day of 
Resurrection. 


Similarly, Allah said: 


476 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Sines WS ppl a hE Gy cw gat BA oe adit gp 
<Verily, those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans, 
they eat up only fire into their bellies, and they will be burnt in 
the blazing Fire!> (4:10) 

Also, reported in an authentic Hadith is that Allah’s 

Messenger 3% said: 


eels WU bi 3 Stl Sy ody oi Tg O58 I BE gale 
«Those who eat or drink in golden or silver plates are filling 
their stomachs with the fire of Jahannam (Hell) .»'"! 
Allah said: 
CAS Be AS pee V5 aecall (5 Ot led I5> 
¢Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor 
purify them, and theirs will be a painful torment .> 


This is because Allah is furious with them for concealing the 
truth. They thus deserve Allah’s anger, so Allah will not look 
at them or purify them, meaning that He will not praise them 
but will cause them to taste a severe torment. Then, Allah said 
about them: 

sah GLEN WALT Gall ASNy 
<Those are they who have purchased error for guidance.> 

Hence, they opposed the guidance, that is, not announcing 
the Prophet’s description they find in their Books, the news 
about his prophecy and the good news of his coming which 
the previous Prophets proclaimed, as well as following and 
believing in him. Instead, they preferred misguidance by 
denying him, rejecting him and concealing his descriptions 
that were mentioned in their Books. Allah said: 

€sidh oaaly> 
<...and torment at the price of forgiveness, 
meaning, they preferred torment over forgiveness due to the 


(1 Sahih Al-Bukhari no. 5634, and Muslim no. 2065. 


Stirah 2, Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 477 

BENZ reves sa Sins they have 

‘Si iba)! isis Ki Sisgottt ie rman Allah then 

ee said: 
ASTRA AT Mong xa $ a i> 
NG BAHT cashed OH 3105 5005 
= ia APNG hale €So how bold they are 
ASK IASG Lob Esch (for evil deeds which 


at cye-s ce || will push them) to the 
Wagers) poe Lops SSH asi Fire. 


ma ge 


Ssh A ere tals Kiigg pasts Allah states that 
they will suffer such 
severe, painful 

hts sail seal, e iB vas alas calle torment that those 
atte (ibe baal? co, & ort t who see them will be 

ai%5 Boadbel od Hebi? in amazed at how they 

caomarniae could bear the 
tremendous 


rae ohana iS eee is; || punishment, torture 
ron and pain that they 

will suffer. We seek 

ditt AP yeas cheas refuge with Allah 


baie from this evil end. 
5 peo ts ada 
LH BIBI bigs Ys Allah’s Statement: 


bed whe 5o 7 ES eae ees 


Sd Anal Sorel Lalsaae ly S65 Hk BL asp 
CH Seal 


That is because Allah has sent down the Book (the Qur’an) in 
truth.> 


means, they deserve this painful torment because Allah has 
revealed Books to His Messenger Muhammad 2%, and the 
Prophets before him, and these revelations bring about truth 
and expose falsehood. Yet, they took Allah’s signs for mockery. 
Their Books ordered them to announce the truth and to spread 
the knowledge, but instead, they defied the knowledge and 
rejected it. This Final Messenger — Muhammad #% — called 
them to Allah, commanded them to work righteousness and 
forbade them from committing evil. Yet, they rejected, denied 
and defied him and hid the truth that they knew about him. 
They, thus, mocked the Aydt that Allah revealed to His 


Pra Rttext 


Rr ASS 7st 


STAMPS LEA Cr) NAGS ARKOA 


478 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Messengers, and this is why they deserved the torment and the 
punishment. This is why Allah said here (2:176): 


Cad pe J SH g URI all 55 Gh chet ts aL ap 


That is because Allah has sent down the Book (the Qur'an) in 
truth. And verily, those who disputed about the Book are far 
away in opposition .> 
Spe ete 2 nae oe Be sete cette 8 Sete are bee ga thd 4 gee ond 
BM oS oh Sl BG ASG BLT Ka Sass UNS ol Gil a RD 
oS ESI Bi it os at & OT Gus Se LG ea 
Wigs penta CG Hi ny UI Gh LO 5 eal yas 
Dine Bate ahe Thee cee ee hee 7g mete tobe 6c aie. 
4S 4 Dats Gas SN OST CH oe FOG Kt y gests 


4177. It is not Birr that you turn your faces towards east and 
(or) west; but Birr is the one who believes in Allah, the Last 
Day, the Angels, the Book, the Prophets and gives his wealth, 
in spite of love for it, to the kinsfolk, to the orphans, and to Al- 
Masakin (the poor), and to the wayfarer, and to those who ask, 
and to set servants free, performs As-Saldh (Iqamat-As-Salah), 
and gives the Zakah, and who fulfill their covenant when they 
make it, and who are patient in extreme poverty and ailment 
(disease) and at the time of fighting (during the battles). Such 
are the people of the truth and they are Al-Muttagun (the 
pious).> 


AL-Birr (Piety, Righteousness) 


This Ayah contains many great wisdoms, encompassing 
rulings and correct beliefs. 

As for the explanation of this Ayah, Allah first commanded 
the believers to face Bayt Al-Maqdis, and then to face the 
Ka‘bah during the prayer. This change was difficult for some 
of the People of the Book, and even for some Muslims. Then 
Allah sent revelation which clarified the wisdom behind this 
command, that is, obedience to Allah, adhering to His 
commands, facing wherever He commands facing, and 
implementing whatever He legislates, that is the objective. 
This is Birr, Taqwa and complete faith. Facing the east or the 
west does not necessitate righteousness or obedience, unless it 
is legislated by Allah. This is why Allah said: 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 479 
4251 0515 Ab Se BEG BANG SS 5G KS 5 J at ip 
<it is not Birr that you turn your faces towards east and (or) 


west (in prayers); but Birr is the one who believes in Allah and 
the Last Day,> 


Similarly, Allah said about the sacrifices: 
4X. Gal 1G SSG OS Gel a de BD 


lt is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches Allah, but 
it is the piety from you that reaches Him.> (22:37) 


Abu Al-‘Aliyah said, “The Jews used to face the west for their 
Qiblah, while the Christians used to face the east for their 
Qibiah. So Allah said: 


daft SE 5G Kats OG J ait Sip 
lt is not Birr that you turn your faces towards east and (or) 
west (in prayers)> (2:177) 
meaning, “this is faith, and its essence requires 


implementation.” Similar was reported from Al-Hasan and Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas.!!) Ath-Thawri recited: 


dail Sa Hit EG 
<but Birr is the one who believes in Allah,> 


and said that what follows are the types of Birr|?! He has said 
the truth. Certainly, those who acquire the qualities mentioned 
in the Ayah will have indeed embraced all aspects of Islam 
and implemented all types of righteousness; believing in Allah, 
that He is the only God worthy of worship, and believing in 
the angels the emissaries between Allah and His Messengers. 
The ‘Books’ are the Divinely revealed Books from Allah to the 
Prophets, which were finalized by the most honorable Book 
(the Qur’én). The Qur’én supercedes all previous Books, it 
mentions all types of righteousness, and the way to happiness 
in this life and the Hereafter. The Qur’aén abrogates all 
previous Books and testfies to all of Allah’s Prophets, from the 
first Prophet to the Final Prophet, Muhammad, may Allah’s 


(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:251. 
[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:253. 


480 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


peace and blessings be upon them all. 
Allah’s statement: 
duh H St usd 
¢...and gives his wealth, in spite of love for it,> 
refers to those who give money away while desiring it and 


loving it. It is recorded in the Sahihayn that Abu Hurayrah 
narrated that the Prophet 3% said: 


wih 35, ah pb et fee Ei, Giai Sf sien pail 
‘The best charity is when you give it away while still healthy 
and thrifty, hoping to get rich and fearing poverty .0!?] 
Allah said: 
SER YIA REO AS Cy Oe pF a eR 
4G 
<And they give food, inspite of their love for it, to the Miskin 
(the poor), the orphan, and the captive (saying): “We feed you 
seeking Allah’s Face only. We wish for no reward, nor thanks 
from you.”} (76:8, 9) 
and: 
2G Val & BUS 
<By no means shall you attain Birr unless you spend of that 
which you love.> (3:92) Allah’s statement: 


CE oe SE SH cect de Ghd 
<...and give them preference over themselves even though they 


were in need of that} (59:9) 


refers to a higher category and status, as the people 
mentioned here give away what they need, while those 
mentioned in the previous Aydt give away what they covet (but 
not necessarily need). 

Allah’s statement: 


4AM 45> 


<the kinsfolk> refers to man’s relatives, who have more rights 


1] Fath Al-Bari 3:334, and Muslim 2:716. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2 481 


than pa an else to one’s charity, as the Hadith supports: 
eye 3 dLe3 Bie sod ‘ae 53 ey ieiiee gStis Je Sian 
wethel, as ob il 


«Sadagah (i.e., charity) given to the poor is a charity, while the 
Sadaqah given to the relatives is both Sadagah and Silah 
(nurturing relations), for ue ae the most deserving of you 
and your kindness and charity».""| 


Allah has commanded kindness to the relatives in many 
places in the Qur’an 


toSisp 
¢to the orphans» The orphans are children who have none to 
look after them, having lost their fathers while they are still 
young, weak and unable to find their own sustenance since 


they have not reached the age of work and adolescence. ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq reported that ‘Ali said that the Prophet #% said: 


kasacisd 


¢and to Al-Masakin> The Miskin is the person who does not have 
enough food, clothing, or he has no dwelling. So the Miskin 
should be granted the provisions to sustain him enough so that 
he can acquire his needs. In the Sahihayn it is recorded that 
Abu Hurayrah said that Allah’s Messenger #% said: 


EN, LAN, ot, F280 3 cal Gish Wig ZSel ooh 
wile Gia J jhe V5 ck ob Ags V gilt Boal oss 


‘The Miskin is not the person who roams around, and whose 
need is met by one or two dates or one or two bites. Rather, the 
Miskin is he who does not have what is sufficient, and to whom 


the people do not pay attention and, thus, do not give him from 
the charity .»!?! 


ht OGY 


qand to the wayfarerp is the needy traveler who runs out of 
money and should, thus, be granted whatever amount that 


(1 Ahmad 4:214. 
21 Fath Al-Bari 3:399, and Muslim 2:719. 


482 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


helps him to go back to his land. Such is the case with whoever 
intends to go on a permissible journey, he is given what he 
needs for his journey and back. The guests are included in this 
category. ‘Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
“Ibn As-Sabil (wayfarer) is the guest who is hosted by 
Muslims.”"! Furthermore, Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, Abu 
Jafar Al-Baqir, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Az-Zuhri, Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas and Mugatil bin Hayyan said similarly.!?! 


in 125 > 
<and to those who ask> refers to those who beg people and are 
thus given a part of the Zakdah and general charity. 


<i) 35> 
and to set servants free> 
These are the servants who seek to free themselves, but 
cannot find enough money to buy their freedom. We will 
mention several of these categories and types under the Tafsir 
of the Ayah on Sadagah in Strat Bard’ah (chapter 9 in the 
Qur'an], In sha’ Allah. 
Allah’s statement: 


qi Shp 
performs As-Salah (Iqamat-As-Salah)» means those who pray on 
time and give the prayer its due right; the bowing, prostration, 


and the necessary attention and humbleness required by Allah. 
Allah’s statement: 


ESB Sieg 


dand gives the Zakah> means the required charity (Zakah) due 
on one’s money, as Said bin Jubayr and Muagatil bin Hayyan 
have stated.!* 

Allah’s statement: 


CGE Uf penis sb 
qand who fulfill their covenant when they make it,> 
"'l thn Abi Hatim 1:259. 


2] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:260. 
3} Ibn Abi Hatim 1:264. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) - 483 
is similar to: 
hE SBE Gl ai ahs Std 
<Those who fulfill the covenant of Allah and break not the 
Mithdag (bond, treaty, covenant).» (13:20) 
The opposite of this characteristic is hypocrisy. As found in a 
Hadith: 
ONE Sold yy HEE 25 151 dS S45 yy Sob Gh So 
‘The signs of a hypocrite are three: if he speaks, he lies; if he 


promises, he breaks his promise; and if he is entrusted, he 
breaches the trust.0!'| 


In another version: 
ib OE IG 5A Gee 155 GAS Ls Lip 
olf he speaks, he lies; if he vows, he breaks his vow; and if he 
disputes, he is lewd .»!?! 
Allah’s statement: 
Coil es BBG KU 4 ge) 
€...and who are patient in extreme poverty and ailment 


(disease) and at the time of fighting (during the battles) .> 
means, during the time of meekness and ailment. 


OA aed 
¢...and at the time of fighting (during the battles) .> 


means on the battlefield while facing the enemy, as Ibn 
Mas‘tid, Ibn ‘Abbas, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Murrah Al-Hamdani, 
Mujahid, Sa‘fid bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas, As-Suddi, Mugatil bin Hayyan, Abu Malik,'S! Ad- 
Dahhak and others have stated.'*! 

And calling them the patient here, is a form «f praise, 
because of the importance of patience in these circumstances, 
and the suffering and difficulties that accompany them. And 


(1) Muslim 1:78. 

(21 tid. 

[3] fbn Abi Hatim 1 :270-271. 
14] At-Tabari 3:355. 


484 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah knows best, it is He Whom help is sought from, and 
upon Him we rely. 
Allah’s statement: 


€ihic St ABI 
<Such are the people of the truth> 
means, whoever acquires these qualities, these are truthful in 
their faith. This is because they have achieved faith in the 


heart and realized it in deed and upon the tongue. So they are 
the truthful, 


5p 22 Das 
¢and they are Al-Muttagiin (the pious).> 
because they avoided the prohibitions and performed the acts 
of obedience. 


Oe CO Neg se Rie days putea gs pt Mase 4 ti pees De ee outs 

53 SAG GAG cit Ai, Ay tal Jia 3 pal Ke OF Gow salt Cap 
é 

gS SS ot Oe GS Gey oh OG oath EGE tS wal 
4. iw 4 feo, oe Gat a \¢ a a re ee 

pad OI doe BS tall 3 aS ine 2M Side WS GS ay weet 


€178. O you who believe! Al-Qisds (the Law of equality) is 
prescribed for you in case of murder: the free for the free, the 
slave for the slave, and the female for the female. But if the 
killer is forgiven by the brother (or the relatives) of the killed 
(against blood money), then it should be sought in a good 
manner, and paid to him respectfully. This is an alleviation and 
a mercy from your Lord. So after this, whoever transgresses the 
limits (i.e. kills the killer after taking the blood money), he shall 
have a painful torment .> 

€179. And there is (a saving of) life for you in Al-Qisas (the 
Law of equality in punishment), O men of understanding, that 
you may acquire Taqwa.> 


The Command and the Wisdom behind the Law of 
Equality 

Allah states: O believers! The Law of equality has been 
ordained on you (for cases of murder), the free for the free, the 
slave for the slave and the female for the female. Therefore, do 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 485 


not transgress the set limits, as others before you transgressed 
them, and thus changed what Allah has ordained for them. 
The reason behind this statement is that (the Jewish tribe of} 
Banu An-Nadir invaded Qurayzah (another Jewish tribe) 
during the time of Jahiliyyah (before Islam) and defeated them. 
Hence, (they made it a law that) when a person from Nadir 
kills a person from Quraizah, he is not killed in retaliation, 
but only pays a hundred Wasq'! of dates. However, when a 
person from Quraizah kills a Nadir man, he would be killed for 
him. If Nadir wanted (to forfeit the execution of the murderer 
and instead require him) to pay a ransom, the Quraizah man 
pays two hundred Wasq of dates [double the amount Nadir 
pays in Diyah (blood money)]. So Allah commanded that 
justice be observed regarding the penal code, and that the 
path of the misguided and mischievous persons be avoided, 
who in disbelief and transgression, defy and alter what Allah 
has commanded them. Allah said: 


iA GAG sal iG iy tat alg Picall Kae SD 
¢Al-Qisas (the Law of equality in punishment) is prescribed for 
you in case of murder: the free for the free, the slave for the 
slave, and the female for the female.> 
Allah’s statement: 


<M SAE Ah Sab iy sap 


the free for the free, the slave for the slave, and the female for 
the female.> 


was abrogated by the statement {life for life} (5:45). However, 
the majority of scholars agree that the Muslim is not killed for 
a disbeliever whom he kills. Al- Bukhari reported that ‘Ali 
narrated that Allah’s Messenger # said: 
eA lt JE Ye 
‘The Muslim is not killed for the disbeliever (whom he 
kills) .0{?! 


No opinion that opposes this ruling could stand correct, nor 
is there an authentic Hadith to contradict it. However, Abu 


(1) A camel load, sixty Sa‘, approximately 165 liters. 
2] Sahih Al-Bukhari no. 111. 


486 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Hanifah thought that the Muslim could be killed for a 
disbeliever, following the general meaning of the Ayah (5:45) in 
Surat Al-Md’idah (chapter 5 in the Qur'an). 

The Four Imams (Abu Hanifah, Malik, Shafit and Ahmad) 
and the majority of scholars stated that the group is killed for 
one person whom they murder. ‘Umar said, about a boy who 
was killed by seven men, “If all the residents of San‘a’ (capital 
of Yemen today) collaborated on killing him, I would kill them 
all.” No opposing opinion was known by the Companions 
during that time which constitutes a near Ijmd‘ (consensus). 
There is an opinion attributed to Imam Ahmad that a group of 
people is not killed for one person whom they kill, and that 
only one person is killed for one person. Ibn Al-Mundhir also 
attributed this opinion to Mu‘adh, Ibn Az-Zubayr, ‘Abdul-Malik 
bin Marwan, Az-Zuhri, Ibn Sirin and Habib bin Abu Thabit. 
Allah’s statement: 

(Pre 


sh OG ail UGE tsk al & A Ge SSD 
<But if the killer is forgiven by the brother (or the relatives) of 


the killed (against blood money), then it should be sought in a 
good manner, and paid to him respectfully.» 


refers to accepting blood money (by the relatives of the victim 
in return for pardoning the killer) in cases of intentional 
murder. This opinion is attributed to Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Abu 
Sha‘tha’, Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, ‘Ata’ Al-Hasan,!! 
Qatadah”! and Mugatil bin Hayyan.'*! Ad-Dahhak said that 
Ibn ‘Abbas said: 


<But if the killer is forgiven by the brother (or the relatives) of 
the killed (against blood money)> 
means the killer is pardoned by his brother (i.e., the relative of 
the victim) and accepting the Diyah after capital punishment 
becomes due (against the killer), this is the ‘Afw (pardon 
mentioned in the Ayah).”*! Allah’s statement: 


Ol thn Abi Hatim 1: 278-279. 
[21 At-Tabari 3 :368. 

[3] Tbn Abi Hatim 1:279. 

4] thn Abi Hatim 1:280. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 487 


tssth (Rd 
¢...then it should be sought in a good manner,» 


means, when the relative agrees to take the blood money, he 
should collect his rightful dues with kindness: 


coy hh Sp 
4 and paid to him respectfully.> 
means, the killer should accept the terms of settlement 


without causing further harm or resisting the payment. 
Allah’s statement: 


s 
5555 KB o Gat Bp 
This is an alleviation and a mercy from your Lord.> 


means the legislation that allows you to accept the blood 
money for intentional murder is an alleviation and a mercy 
from your Lord. It lightens what was required from those who 
were before you, either applying capital punishment or 
forgiving. 

Sa‘id bin Mansur reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The 
Children of Israel were required to apply the Law of equality in 
murder cases and were not allowed to offer pardons (in return 
for blood money). Allah said to this Ummah (the Muslim 
nation): 


4The Law of equality in punishment is prescribed for you in 
case of murder : the free for the free, the servant for the servant, 
and the female for the female. But if the killer is forgiven by the 
brother (or the relatives) of the killed (against blood money),> 
Hence, ‘pardoning’ or ‘forgiving’ means accepting blood 
money in intentional murder cases.”!'] ‘Ibn Hibban also 
recorded this in his Sahih.'?] Qatadah said: 


45S ot Ge Sp 


\\). Sunan Sa‘id bin Mansar 2 :652. 
[21 tpn Hibban 7 :601. 


488 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<This is an alleviation from your Lord> 


Allah had mercy on this Ummah by giving them the Diyah 
which was not allowed for any nation before it. The People of 
the Torah (Jews) were allowed to either apply the penal code 
(for murder, i.e., execution) or to pardon the killer, but they 
were not allowed to take blood money. The People of the Injil 
(the Gospel - the Christians) were required to pardon (the 
killer, but no Diyah was legislated). This Ummah (Muslims) is 
allowed to apply the penal code (execution) or to pardon and 
accept the blood money.” Similar was reported from Sa‘id bin 
Jubayr, Muqatil bin Hayyan and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas.!! 

Allah’s statement: 


4h Le 45 is a5 Est Sp 


€So after this whoever transgresses the limits, he shall have a 
painful torment.> 
means, those who kill in retaliation after taking the Diyah or 
accepting it, they will suffer a painful and severe torment from 
Allah. The same was reported from Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, ‘Ata’ 
Tkrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, As-Suddi and 
Mudatil bin Hayyan.!! 


The Benefits and Wisdom of the Law of Equality 
Allah’s statement: 
C55 taal g KG> 
¢And there is life for you in Al-Qisas> 
legislating the Law of equality, i.e., killing the murderer, 
carries great benefits for you. This way, the sanctity of life will 
be preserved because the killer will refrain from killing, as he 
will be certain that if he kills, he would be killed. Hence life 
will be preserved. In previous Books, there is a statement that 


killing stops further killing! This meaning came in much 
clearer and eloquent terms in the Qur'an: 


tio aall 3 ob5> 
01 thn Abi Hatim 1:274-275. 
2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :278-279. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2 489 


iS seated ¢And there is (a saving 
“aes cob zc --< lof) life for you in Al- 
reece WI ps gel a Gene as of equal- 

ck FA ER 1 ay & Pesan ity ae ity in punishment) .> 
4 at aye +34 Abu Al-‘Aliyah said, 
pear NEM acdemiien “Allah andes the Law 
KNB S me eapulsite & O seis Lj lof equality a ‘life’. 
fsctet ack: ole tage < ||} Hence, how many a 
Sade Vai SEN “4° | man who thought 
Ae plese RAY: oS : An eat 45 4,44 || about killing, but this 
; eg Law prevented him 

3% 7 Ate Sy Gore a Jt oa 
ey 2k \ Lm | 94 gad 330 |! trom killing for fear 
4 : . 

2 shbrsSlaateiccs | athe wl be I 
FNRI Sos SGA cage ses statements were 
reported from 
Mujahid, Sa‘id bin 
Listes st aca Jubayr, Abu Malik, 


ree ee s,---a7 | Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 
er reory SMe | ar-Rabi’ bin Anas 


fx beer ed teer be oe re ; 
C3} KE Speak; Sole and Mugatil bin 


aks Hayyan.!'! Allah’s 
SEQ Casha Oh ese statement: 
itt 5 AIL it AB | eat oI usted 


Osis 


PAEABER 


¢O men of understanding, that you may acquire Taqwa.> 


means, ‘O you who have sound minds, comprehension and 
understanding! Perhaps by this you will be compelled to 
refrain from transgressing the prohibitions of Allah and what 
He considers sinful.’ Taqwa (mentioned in the Ayah) is a word 
that means doing all acts of obedience and refraining from all 
prohibitions. 
BGNG ish ei VS GF y Sy Set pa yy Kee csp 
2 eee te ae at (esate ve 1% ” 


at &y tie Git a We ae was AG os Seg eH 
Ab it Sy ake Oh Ee oh cy SU dt GE FG hee bs 


"1 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:290-292. 


490 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€180. It is prescribed for you, when death approaches any of 
you, if he leaves wealth, that he makes a bequest to parents and 
next of kin, according to reasonable manners. (This is) a duty 
upon Al-Muttagin (the pious) .> 


€181. Then whoever changes it after hearing it, the sin shall be 
on those who make the change. Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All- 
Knower .> 


€182. But he who fears from a testator some unjust act or 
wrongdoing, and thereupon he makes peace between the parties 
concerned, there shall be no sin on him. Certainly, Allah is 
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful .> 


Including Parents and Relatives in the Will was later 
abrogated 


This Ayah contains the command to include parents and 
relatives in the will, which was obligatory, according to the 
most correct view, before the Ayah about inheritance was 
revealed. When the Ayah of inheritance was revealed, this 
Ayah was abrogated, so fixed shares of the inheritance for 
deserving recipients were legislated by Allah. Therefore, 
deserving inheritors take their fixed inheritance without the 
need to be included in the will or to be reminded of the favor 
of the inherited person. For this reason we see the Hadith 
narrated in the Sunan and other books that ‘Amr bin Kharijah 
said: I heard Allah’s Messenger 3% saying in a speech: 


(13) rearey 3G ads ir er) js tei 35 ai bp 
tAllah has given each heir his fixed share. So there is no will 
for a deserving heir 9"! 


Imam Ahmad recorded that Muhammad bin Sirin said: Ibn 
‘Abbas recited Stirat Al-Bagarah (chapter 2 in the Qur’an) until 
he reached the Ayah: 


45S YG GG ogi US TF op 


( Tunfat Al-Ahwadhi 6 :313, An-Nasa’i 6 :247, and Ibn Majah 2 :905. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 491 


¢...if he leaves wealth, that he makes a bequest to parents and 
next of kin.> 


He then said, “This Ayah was abrogated.” This was recorded 
by Safid bin Mansar and Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak!) Al- 
Hakim Said, “It is Sahih according to their criteria (Al-Bukhari 
and Muslim)”. Ibn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said 
that Allah’s statement: 


€5GING sl SEI 
<a bequest to parents and next of kin> 
was abrogated by the Ayah: 


ee 4 ¢ Aga 


Ji, ZING ong 3 ke as wy NG ogi BF GSS yep 
4 4 o te ef Deo 
Cyr aed af 


<There is a share for men and a share for women from what is 
left by parents and those nearest related, whether the property 
be small or large — a legal share.> (4:7) 


Ibn Abu Hatim then said, “It was reported from Ibn Umar, 
Abu Musa, Said bin Musayyib, Al-Hasan, Mujahid, ‘Ata’ Sa‘id 
bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Sirin,*! dkrimah,'*! Zayd bin 
Aslam and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas. Qatadah, As-Suddi, Mugatil bin 
Hayyan,|"*! Tawas,!5! Ibrahim An-Nakha‘l, Shurayh, Ad- 
Dahhak and Az-Zuhri said that this Ayah (2:180 above) was 
abrogated by the Ayah about the inheritors (4:7).”"® 


The Will for the Relatives that do not qualify as 
Inheritors 


It is recommended that the remaining relatives who do not 
have a designated fixed share of the inheritance, be willed up 
to a third, due to the general meaning of the Ayah about the 


will. It is recorded in the Sahithayn that Ibn Umar said that 
Allah’s Messenger # said: 


|"! Said bin Mansur 2 :663,-and Al-Hakim 2:273. 
[2] fbn Abi Hatim 1:301-302. 

3] At-Tabari 3:391. 

(41 thn Abi Hatim 1:302-303. 

1S) At-Tabari 3 :389. 

{61 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:303. 


492 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Mike G6 B55 WH Ld eotitgh Deca & 
«lt is not permissible for any Muslim who has something to 
will to stay for two nights without having his last will and 
testament written and kept ready with him.» 


Ibn Umar commented, “Ever since I heard this statement 
from Allah’s Messenger #, no night has passed, but my will is 
kept ready with me.”'! There are many other Aydt and Ahddith 
ordering kindness and generosity to one’s relatives. 


The Will should observe Justice 


The will should be fair, in that one designates a part of the 
inheritance to his relatives without committing injustice 
against his qualified inheritors and without extravagance or 
stinginess. It is recorded in the Sahihayn'?! that Sa‘d bin Abu 
Waqqas said, “O Allah’s Messenger! I have some money and 
only a daughter inherits from me, should | will all my 
remaining property (to others)?” He said, “No.” Sa‘d said, 
“Then may I will half of it?” He said, “No.” Sa‘d said, “One- 
third?” He said, “Yes, one-third, yet even one-third is too 
much. It is better for you to leave your inheritors wealthy than 
to leave them poor, begging from others.” Al-Bukhari 
mentioned in his Sahih that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “I recommend 
that people reduce the proportion of what they bequeath by 
will to a fourth (of the whole legacy) rather than a third, for 
Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


ees S151, Sibi 
One-third, yet even one-third is too much 0") 


Allah’s statement: 
diag be St AIS Sal A Op fee cas WS SS 
<Then whoever changes it after hearing it, the sin shall be on 
those who make the change. Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All- 
Knower.> 


(! Fath ALBari 5:419, and Muslim 3:1249 and 1250. 
21 Fath ALBari 5:724, and Muslim 3:1250. 
3] Sahih ALBukhari no. 2743. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 493 


means, whoever changed the will and testament or altered it 
by addition or deletion, including hiding the will as is obvious, 
then 


fe we $9E 


4535 Sat fe 25, Tgp 
the sin shall be on those who make the change.> 


Ibn ‘Abbas and others said, “The dead person’s reward will 
be preserved for him by Allah, while the sin is acquired by 
those who change the will.”4!! 


ee Ge at yy 
<Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower.> 


means, Allah knows what the dead person has bequeathed 
and what the beneficiaries (or others) have changed in the will. 
Allah’s statement: 


Qt  477 4 Ayo ort 
4 TE ot oe GE SG 


<But he who fears froma testator some unjust act or 
wrongdoing ,> 


Ibn ‘Abbas, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Mujahid, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi‘ 
bin Anas and As-Suddi said, “Error.”?! These errors include 
such cases as when the inheritor indirectly acquires more 
than his fair share, such as by being allocated that a certain 
item mentioned in the legacy be sold to him. Or, the testator 
might include his daughter’s son in the legacy to increase his 
daughter’s share in the inheritance, and so forth. Such errors 
might occur out of the kindness of the heart without thinking 
about the consequences of these actions, or by sinful 
intention. In such cases, the executive of the will and 
testament is allowed to correct the errors and to replace the 
unjust items in the will with a better solution, so that both the 
Islamic law and what the dead person had wished for are 
respected and observed. This act would not constitute an 
alteration in the will and this is why Allah mentioned it 
specifically, so that it is excluded from the prohibition (that 
prohibits altering the will and testament) mentioned in the 


() At-Tabari 3 :397. 
2) Ibn Abi Hatim 1:310-311. 


494 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
previous Ayah. And Allah knows best. 


The Virtue of Fairness in the Will 


‘Abdur-Razzaq reported that Abu Hurayrah said that Allah’s 
Messenger 3 said: 


aes 2 Ste oo5f bb Es ats Sh eh ee God tn Sp 
Ee Ste Sn BT ow ead og Sy 5th JES ace 5 J hs 


‘A man might perform the works of righteous people for 
seventy years, but when he dictates his will, he commits 
injustice and thus his works end with the worst of his deeds and 
he enters the Fire. A man might perform the works of evil 
people for seventy years, but then dictates a just will and thus 
ends with the best of his deeds and then enters Paradise.» 


Abu Hurayrah then said, “Read if you wish: 
lass SAM Gp 


<These are the limits ordained by Allih, so do not transgress 
them.»’""! (2:229) 


i eats oe dl OT OS tel eek Od ihn adi E> 
BAGS Ao BI as Ke OF Saks el msg 
Wis by WE 6 BE OS se poe Gk BA <ul 

<i 55 pas of peal 


€183. O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you as it 
was prescribed for those before you, that you may acquire 
Taqwa.> 

4184. Fast for a fixed number of days, but if any of you is ill 
or on a journey, the same number (should be made up) from 
other days. And as for those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., 
an old man), they have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a 
Miskin (poor person) (for every day). But whoever does good of 
his own accord, it is better for him. And that you fast is better 


(1) ‘Abdur-Razzaq 9:88. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 495 
for you if only you know .> 


The Order to Fast 


In an address to the believers of this Ummah, Allah ordered 
them to fast, that is, to abstain from food, drink and sexual 
activity with the intention of doing so sincerely for Allah the 
Exalted alone. This is because fasting purifies the souls and 
cleanses them from the evil that might mix with them and 
their ill behavior. Allah mentioned that He has ordained 
fasting for Muslims just as He ordained it for those before 
them, they being an example for them in that, so they should 
vigorously perform this obligation more obediently than the 
previous nations. Similarly, Allah said: 


C3 Sid GS tes EN ree i ES as te SS KD 
© pores et cere MeL, 

4555S iA Sa, 

€To each among you, We have prescribed a law and a clear 
way. If Allah had willed, He would have made you one nation, 


but that (He) may test you in what He has given you; so 
compete in good deeds.> (5:48) 


Allah said in this Ayah: 
SUS ah oe Saal KTS peal pe CS hae all ele 
<5 as 
€O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was 


prescribed for those before you, that you may have Taqwa) .> 


since the fast cleanses the body and narrows the paths of 
Shaytan. In the Sahihayn the following Hadith was recorded: 


cially alas hits 6S 325 E55 seth Se Gabon oo ih 5 
ley J Sp 
«O young people! Whoever amongst you can afford marriage, 


let him marry. Whoever cannot afford it, let him fast, for it will 
be a shield for him "| 


Allah then states that the fast occurs during a fixed number 
of days, so that it does not become hard on the hearts, 


(1) Fath ALBari 9:8, and Muslim 2:1018. 


496 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


thereby weakening their resolve and endurance.) 


The various Stages of Fasting 


Al-Bukhari and Muslim recorded that ‘A’ishah said, “(The 
day of) ‘Ashura’ was a day of fasting. When the obligation to 
fast Ramadan was revealed, those who wished fasted, and 
those who wished did not.”'! Al-Bukhari recorded the same 
from Ibn ‘Umar and Ibn Mas‘ad.!?! 

Allah said: 

GS tab ak BAM ol Bop 
<...those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they 
have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person) 
(for every day).> 

Mu‘adh commented, “In the beginning, those who wished, 
fasted and those who wished, did not fast and fed a poor 
person for each day.” Al- Bukhari recorded Salamah bin Al- 
Akwa‘ saying that when the Ayah: 

5S GL 8 KAM sl 65> 

¢...those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they 

have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person) 

(for every day).> 
was revealed, those who did not wish to fast, used to pay the 
Fidyah (feeding a poor person for each day they did not fast) 
until the following Ayah (2:185) was revealed abrogating the 
previous Ayah.'*! It was also reported from ‘Ubaydullah from 
Nafi‘ that Ibn ‘Umar said; “It was abrogated.” '! As-Suddi 
reported that Murrah narrated that ‘Abdullah said about this 
Ayah: 


q5Se (Ab To KAM oll Jesp 


<those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old man), they 
have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin (poor person) 


1) Fath AlBari 8: 26 and Muslim 2 :792. 
[2] Fath Al-Bari 8:26. 

3] Fath Al-Bari 8:29. 

(4) tid. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 497 
(for every day) .> 
“It means ‘those who find it difficult (to fast).’ Formerly, those 
who wished, fasted and those who wished, did not but fed a 
poor person instead.”!! Allah then said: 
<But whoever does good of his own accord> 
meaning whoever fed an extra poor person, 


Cred BAAS ol BE 38 
¢it is better for him. And that you fast is better for you> 
Later the Ayah: 


diss Si Ke id Sp 


<So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the 
month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must 
observe Sawim (fasting) that month» (2:185) 


was revealed and this abrogated the previous Ayah (2:184). 


The Fidyah (Expiation) for breaking the Fast is for the 
Old and the Ailing 


Al-Bukhari reported that ‘Ata heard Ibn ‘Abbas recite: 
Cie iGo Gh HA idl 
¢And as for those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old 
man), they have (a choice either to fast or) to feed a Miskin 
(poor person) (for every day) .> 
Ibn ‘Abbas then commented, “(This Ayah) was not abrogated, 
it is for the old man and the old woman who are able to fast 
with difficulty, but choose instead to feed a poor person for 
every day (they do not fast).”*! Others reported that Sa‘id bin 
Jubayr mentioned this from Ibn ‘Abbas. So the abrogation 
here applies to the healthy person, who is not traveling and 
who has to fast, as Allah said: 


¥ ST acas td ° 4 7% 
( Fath AL-Bari 8:28. 
2) Fath Al-Bari 8:28. 


498 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the 
month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must 
observe Sawm (fasting) that month.> (2:185) 


As for the old man (and woman) who cannot fast, he is 
allowed to abstain from fasting and does not have to fast 
another day instead, because he is not likely to improve and 
be able to fast other days. So he is required to pay a Fidyah 
for every day missed. This is the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas and 
several others among the Salaf who read the Ayah: 


EAB Nl 1 
¢And as for those who can fast with difficulty, (e.g., an old 
man)> 


to mean those who find it difficult to fast!'! as Ibn Mas‘ad 
stated. This is also the opinion of Al-Bukhari who said, “As for 
the old man (person) who cannot fast, (he should do like) Anas 
who, for one or two years after he became old fed some bread 
and meat to a poor person for each day he did not fast.”4! 

This point, which Al-Bukhari attributed to Anas without a 
chain of narrators, was collected with a continuous chain of 
narrators by Abu Yala Mawsuli in his Musnad, that Ayyub bin 
Abu Tamimah said; “Anas could no longer fast. So he made a 
plate of Tharid (broth, bread and meat) and invited thirty poor 
persons and fed them.”*! The same ruling applies for the 
pregnant and breast-feeding women if they fear for themselves 
or their children or fetuses. In this case, they pay the Fidyah 
and do not have to fast other days in place of the days that 
they missed. 


SOAS wa4i S os cd sks oii as LA adi Ba 
TA ati BS oe Ae ee ws Ea HK AS 
fe aii as TL eats Foal fey a SG St ley tit LY 
CE OKE peal oss 
4185. The month of Ramadan in which was revealed the 
Qur'an, a guidance for mankind and clear proofs for the 


(1) at-Tabari 3:431. 
(2) Fath ALBari 8:179. 
(3) Musnad Abu Ya‘la 7:204. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 499 


guidance and the criterion (between right and wrong). So 
whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the 
month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must 
observe Sawm (fasting) that month, and whoever is ill or on a 
journey, the same number fof days which one did not observe 
Sawin (fasting) must be made up] from other days. Allah 
intends for you ease, and He does not want to make things 
difficult for you. (He wants that you) must complete the same 
number (of days), and that you must magnify Allah [i.e., to 
say Takbir (Allahu Akbar: Allah is the Most Great)] for having 
guided you so that you may be grateful to Him.> 


The Virtue of Ramadan and the Revelation of the Qur’an 
in it. 


Allah praised the month of Ramadan out of the other 
months by choosing it to send down the Glorious Qur’an, just 
as He did for all of the Divine Books He revealed to the 
Prophets. Imam Ahmad reported Wathilah bin Al-Asqa‘ that 
Allah’s Messenger 34 said: 

de Seas LY Hyg gly Suess US UST YB pels Ge igh 

CY Sip ar Ogi, Stay f, SE Ete Sod Joly Stas; 

toad) Je CLE 34 Fe 
(The Suhuf (Pages) of Ibrahim were revealed during the first 
night of Ramadan. The Torah was revealed during the sixth 
night of Ramadan. The Injil was revealed during the thirteenth 


night of Ramadan. Allah revealed the Qur'an on the twenty- 
fourth night of Ramadan .»!"| 


The Virtues of the Qur’an 
Allah said: 
E5GHG BB Si pS lc 
¢...a guidance for mankind and clear proofs for the guidance 
and the criterion (between right and wrong).> 
Here Allah praised the Qur’an, which He revealed as 
"Il Ahmad 4 :107. 


500 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


guidance for the hearts of those who believe in it and adhere 
to its commands. Allah said: 


45-55 
¢and clear proofs> 


meaning, as clear and unambiguous signs and unequivocal 
proof for those who understand them. These proofs testify to 
the truth of the Qur’an, its guidance, the opposite of 
misguidance, and how it guides to the Straight path, the 
opposite of the wrong path, and the distinction between the 
truth and falsehood, and the permissible and the prohibited. 


The Obligation of Fasting Ramadan 
Allah said: 


+ a ot o£ 4 
diets Sebi Ky id Gp 


€So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the 
month (of Ramadan, i.e., is present at his home), he must 
observe Sawm (fasting) that month.> 


This Ayah requires the healthy persons who witness the 
beginning of the month, while residing in their land, to fast 
the month. This Ayah abrogated the Ayah that allows a 
choice of fasting or paying the Fidyah. When Allah ordered 
fasting, He again mentioned the permission for the ill person 
and the traveler to break the fast and to fast other days 
instead as compensation. Allah said: 


44 G oe Be « tor ar 44 4 oe or 
QIAN ASI TS AS fe I as Slee 5 


€...and whoever is ill or on a journey, the same number [of 
days which one did not observe Sawm (fasting) must be made 
up] from other days.> 


This Ayah indicates that ill persons who are unable to fast 
or fear harm by fasting, and the traveler, are all allowed to 
break the fast. When one does not fast in this case, he is 
obliged to fast other days instead. Allah said: 


4525 thay Lf Sh ST flan AD 
Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make 
things difficult for you .» 


Sdrah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2 501 


This Ayah indicates that Allah allowed such persons, out of 
His mercy and to make matters easy for them, to break the 
fast when they are ill or traveling, while the fast is still 
obligatory on the healthy persons who are not traveling. 


Several Rulings concerning the Fast 


The authentic Sunnah states that Allah’s Messenger #% 
traveled during the month of Ramadan for the battle for 
Makkah. The Prophet 3 marched until he reached the area of 
Kadid and then broke his fast and ordered those who were with 
him to do likewise. This was recorded in the Two Sahihs|!! 
Breaking the fast mentioned in this Hadith was not required, 
for the Companions used to go out with Allah’s Messenger 
during the month of Ramadan, then, some of them would fast 
while some of them would not fast and neither category would 
criticize the others. If the command mentioned in the Hadith 
required breaking the fast, the Prophet 2% would have criticized 
those who fasted. Allah’s Messenger # himself sometimes 
fasted while traveling. For instance, it is reported in the Two 
Sahihs that Abu Ad-Darda’ said, “We once went with Allah’s 
Messenger # during Ramadan while the heat was intense. One 
of us would place his hand on his head because of the intense 
heat. Only Allah’s Messenger #2 and ‘Abdullah bin Rawahah 
were fasting at that time.”?! 

We should state that observing the permission to break the 
fast while traveling is better, as Allah’s Messenger # said 
about fasting while traveling: 


ele CEE SG ple 35 Sos shal in 
‘Those who did not fast have done good, and there is no harm 
for those who fasted .»'°! 
In another Hadith, the Prophet # said: 
Gl sob Ji a aby pin 
‘Hold to Allah’s permission that He has granted you .0!*) 

(I Fath Al-Bari 3:213, Muslim 2:784. 
2] Fath Al-Bari 4:215, and Muslim 2:790. 


{31 Muslim 2:790. 
41 Muslim 2:786. 


502 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Some scholars say that the two actions are the same, as 
‘A'ishah narrated that Hamzah bin ‘Amr Al-Aslami said, “O 
Messenger of Allah! I fast a lot, should I fast while traveling?” 
The Prophet # said: 


«Fast if you wish or do not fast if you wish.» 

This Hadith is in the Two Sahihs.""! It was reported that if 
the fast becomes difficult (while traveling), then breaking the 
fast is better. Jabir said that Allah’s Messenger #3 saw a man 
who was being shaded (by other people while traveling). The 


Prophet # asked about him and he was told that man was 
fasting. The Prophet # said: 
AIS LA SH Sy Gc 
«It is not a part of Birr (piety) to fast while traveling.» 
This was recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.!?! 

As for those who ignore the Sunnah and believe in their 
hearts that breaking the fast while traveling is disliked, they 
are required to break the fast and are not allowed to fast. 

As for making up for missed fasting days, it is not required 
to be consecutive. One may do so consecutively or not 
consecutively. There are ample proofs to this fact. We should 
mention that fasting consecutive days is only required 
exclusively during Ramadan. After the month of Ramadan, 


what is required then is to merely make up for missed days. 
This is why Allah said: 


¢...the same number (should be made up) from other days.> 


Ease and not Hardship 
Allah then said: 
45a thay Lh SG ST fey St LD 
¢Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make 
things difficult for you.> 


(1) Fath ALBGri 4:211, and Muslim 2:789. 
[2] Fath ALBari 4:216, and Muslim 2:786. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 503 


Imam Ahmad recorded Anas bin Malik saying that Allah’s 
Messenger 3 said: 
ME YG Uik25 ytd V5 y3t0 
‘Treat the people with ease and don't be hard on them; give 
them glad tidings and don’t fill them with aversion .» 

This Hadith was also collected in the Two Sahihs.''! It is 
reported in the Sahihayn that Allah’s Messenger # said to 
Mu ‘adh and Abu Musa when he sent them to Yemen: 

SS V5 eg thdy ed V5 15455 1 Wg yb 
‘Treat the people with ease and don’t be hard on them; give 


them glad tidings and don’t fi them with aversion; and love 
each other, and don’t differ .»'*! 


The Sunan and the Musnad compilers recorded that Allah’s 
Messenger 3% said: 


GA tly eign 
«] was sent with the easy Hanifiyyah (Islamic Monotheism) .»!5! 
Allah’s statement: 
CAS eas Fat ey Ln Wh Lit peey i A> 
<Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make 


things difficult for you. (He wants that ais must complete the 
same number (of days)> 


means: You were allowed to break the fast while ill, while 
traveling, and so forth, because Allah wanted to make matters 
easy for you. He only commanded you to make up for missed 
days so that you complete the days of one month. 


Remembering Allah upon performing the Acts of 
Worship 


Allah’s statement: 
(KG Ge ai Igpdenths > 


0) Ahmad 3:131, and 209, Fath Al-Bari 10:541, and Muslim 3:1359. 
[2] Fath Al-Bari 7 :660, Muslim 3 :1587. 
{31 Ahmad 5 :266. 


504 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€...and that you must magnify Allah fi.e., to say Takbir 
(Allahu Akbar : Allah is the Most Great)] for having guided you> 


means: So that you remember Allah upon finishing the act of 
worship. This is similar to Allah’s statement: 


Ei, Zens EAN H cheticn SEK Si WyEeiE es ics 53> 
€So when you have accomplished your Manasik, (rituals) 


remember Allah as you remember your forefathers or with far 
more remembrance.> (2:200) and: 


KS OF 1 USGS Ss ANT Ls Lat Ci BD 

S Sanya 
<...Then when the (Jumu‘ah) Salah (prayer) is ended, you may 
disperse through the land, and seek the bounty of Allah (by 


working), and remember Allah much, that you may be 
successful.> (62:10) and: 


rede wort a Pe atte aa °% e as a4 fee oo eere 
Ay as So etl G5 Vo gb Jo oh ae Aioap 
ons] 


€...and glorify the praises of your Lord, before the rising of the 
sun and before (its) setting. And during a part of the night, 
glorify His praises, and after the prayers.» (50:39, 40) 


This is why the Sunnah encouraged Tasbih (saying Subhan 
Allah, i.e., all praise is due to Allah), Tahmid (saying Al-Hamdu 
Lillah, i.e., all the thanks are due to Allah) and Takbir (saying 
Allahu Akbar, i.e., Allah is the Most Great) after the 
compulsory prayers. Ibn ‘Abbas said, “We used to know that 
Allah’s Messenger #5 has finished the prayer by the Takbir.”|") 
Similarly, several scholars have stated that reciting Takbir the 
during ‘Id-ul-Fitr was specified by the Ayah that states: 


4555 G fe Sted; TL Lents > 
<(He wants that you) must complete the same number (of 
days), and that you must magnify Allah [i.e., to say Takbir 
(Allahu Akbar: Allah is the Most Great)] for having guided 
you...> 


(1) Sahih Al-Bukhari no. 842. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 505 


Allah’s statement: 
dinikis cents 
¢...so that you may be grateful to Him.> 


means: If you adhere to what Allah commanded you, obeying 
Him by performing the obligations, abandoning the 
prohibitions and abiding by the set limits, then perhaps you 
will be among the grateful. 


J ingiah O63 1) gai ts Cot 25 aS & cae tik 15> 

4G. Solky AID y ibs 
€186. And when My servants ask you (O Muhammad 3% 
concerning Me, then answer them), I am indeed near (to them 
by My knowledge). I respond to the invocations of the 
supplicant when he calls on Me (without any mediator or 


intercessor). So let them obey Me and believe in Me, so that 
they may be led aright .> 


Allah hears the Servant’s Supplication 


Imam Ahmad reported that Abu Musa Al-Ash‘ari said, “We 
were in the company of Allah’s Messenger during a battle. 
Whenever we climbed a high place, went up a hill or went down 
a valley, we used to say, ‘Allah is the Most Great,’ raising our 
voices. The Prophet # came by us and said: 


Ch Ge Vy tol 528 XE kT ye tg edn df 
beglely SE be Sus Hy OSS 28 cil iy Gee OS 

edly Vig V5 d5s V egal 58 , tas Gulf vis 3s arate 
«O people! Be merciful to yourselves (i.e., don’t raise your 
voices), for you are not calling a deaf or an absent one, but One 
Who is All-Hearer, All-Seer. The One Whom you call is closer 
to one of you than the neck of his animal. O ‘Abdullah bin Qais 
(Abu Musa’s name) should I teach you a statement that is a 


treasure of Paradise: ‘La hawla wa la quwwata illa billah (there 
is no power or strength except from Allah).’" 


0) Ahmad 4:402. 


506 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


This Hadith was also recorded in the Two Sahihs,!"| and Abu 
Dawud, An-Nasai,: At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah recorded similar 
wordings. Furthermore, Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas said 
that the Prophet 2 said: 

0 gles 15) 28 Uy oy gate Gb te OF yes Sin dks 
«“Allah the Exalted said, ‘I am as My servant thinks of Me, 
and I am with him whenever he invokes Me.'s!*! 


Allah accepts the Invocation 


Imam Ahmad also recorded Abu Sa‘id saying that the 
Prophet # said: 
BET YY oped bs Vy Al ed Go ae JS Fe at A ht Ge 
oS Wek Sf ty Syes Fee ey ste eh GY ye 
sf im GG SE by SG tgs tn ye Be Gs Sf ay ae 
«No Muslim supplicates to Allah with a Du‘a that does not 
involve sin or cutting the relations of the womb, but Allah will 
grant him one of the three things. He will either hasten the 
response to his supplication, save it for him until the Hereafter, 
or would turn an equivalent amount of evil away from him.” 


They said, “What if we were to recite more (Du‘d).” He 
said, ‘There is more with Allah .1'°! 


‘Abdullah the son of Imam Ahmad recorded ‘Ubadah bin As- 
Samit saying that the Prophet # said: 
ety Bi BUT Sy 35255 Jey Se wt 2g Lt de oN ab ye 
eer Saas By eda pH be oA Ge He GS GH 
‘There is no Muslim man on the face of the earth who 
supplicates to Allah but Allah would either grant it to him, or 
avert a harm from him of equal proportions, as long as his 


supplication does not involve sin or cutting the relations of the 
womb.»! At-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith.'>! 


1 Fath Al-Bari 2:509 and Muslim 4:2076. 
[2] Ahmad 3:210. 

{3} Ahmad 3:18. 

(41 Ahmad 5:329. 

IS} Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 10:24. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 507 


Imam Malik recorded that Abu Hurayrah narrated that 
Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 
td Cee pb 525 OE jas Ju oY Sue 
“One's supplication will be accepted as long as he does become 
get hasty and say, ‘I have supplicated but it has not been 
accepted from me ,’’s!1I 
This Hadith is recorded in the Two Sahihs!?) from Malik, and 


this is the wording of Al-Bukhari. 

Muslim recorded that the Prophet 3 said: 

GB entity DG ed eb GT AL pa JG a Sees Jig 

HN pdb byes i, 2525 5 Syke OU coe uy cit es 
wes £85 ys Be 5 J Sy 

‘The supplication of the servant will be accepted as long as he 

does not supplicate for what includes sin, or cutting the 

relations of the womb, and as long as he does not become 

hasty.1 He was asked, “O Messenger of Allah! How does 

one become hasty?” He said, «He says, ‘I supplicated and 

supplicated, but I do not see that my supplication is being 


accepted from me.’ He thus looses interest and abandons 
supplicating (to Allah) .»!°! 


Three Persons Whose Supplication will not be rejected 


In the Musnad of Imam Ahmad and the Sunans of At- 
Tirmidhi, An-Nasai and Ibn Majah it is recorded that Abu 
Hurayrah narrated that Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 


sp lash 5255 he Se ley Jat Guy saghes bd ¥ bod 
vin dk chen Sif gi Ces ch 65; pL 3,3 wr Yay; 
‘Three persons will not have their supplication rejected : the just ruler, 


the fasting person until breaking the fast, and the supplication of the 
oppressed person, for Allah raises it above the clouds on the Day of 


"'l Ahmad 2:396. 
2 Fath Al-Bari 11:145, and Muslim 4:2095. 
[3] Muslim 4 :2096. 


508 | Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


v4 EESER Resurrection, and the 


ween. 4 4600 ye ote <4 || doors of heaven will be 
Sey ip arnipiany : 2 
rashes ad sing ’ lamog opened for it, and Allah 
“Ze A Esler ct 4 203 Be rf ‘ 
DCE 2S Eats SUS SS | says, “By My grace! I 
wap bas wee e.g 44 || will certainly grant it 
24 eee aA 407 Bhs os ot as ‘ 
Shy ab subs Rabe ols pSentil |! for you, even if after a 
Seertrce Got srrrre Cees rt suet, : , 
SIRE EAA RS SVMS |] while.’ 


wr pty eer reF 5% pone te rok fe Por se fhe 2 Seer e@ 
cA a MLSS GATES | 251 cat a a St 


a 


22707 oS - 


Pa 
vi. @ 


tacts the 2 acts Hq | eke ef 25 KO 
Bod 35 Sve aN Ey ESS SN! ah SoG aye Jt 


a 


* ° es ae Pxa oat be, SE gle ve 4 < ’ 
WNL WEGS BIG N32 Gs | AT cel St oe Oot 


tee s ALIN 2 ae f > 
SE ARES @ oe 


ot Zens i. g see nw, eh obs “tf (Achy thes lh Ke 5 
Edt pi deal EM NG SaiaJhy |? em ee 
Warts (65 pS fat Clee v 


mi ok w44 wh “28 


isi a | eS ect sc 


- 


7 S404 oF 4, 4? "et 
= 7%. 


sper inf % 
Bie @ BSE as Ay LLG 14 LEN KE g 
de rene a ea, Sy 4 err oa ig Zee er i ee i oe one & 
NAL BSG CS ABD EN EE We ee ot pf 
HZ SL bl 3 pall ei pal 


SH HE Bn ANS 


AAS ANASG Ao AN 
4 ope Zeg " Sor 
BBN MSs 

oo ° ae ¢ 


25.4% Ge © Se ve 
Lay % sti oy ei 
iy dct 4g Ope 2h 
DS Gye G af 32 


o ate . pte bo 


Ses AD oct. Ot 
Bi nd 
4187. It is made lawful for you to have sexual relations with 
your wives on the night of As-Siyam (fasting). They are Libas 
[i.e., body-cover, or screen] for you and you are Libas for 
them. Allah knows that you used to deceive yourselves, so He 
turned to you (accepted your repentance) and forgave you. So 
now have sexual relations with them and seek that which Allah 
has ordained for you (offspring), and eat and drink until the 
white thread (light) of dawn appears to you distinct from the 
black thread (darkness of night), then complete your fast till the 
nightfall. And do not have sexual relations with them (your 


(1) Ahmad 3:544, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 7 :229, and Ibn Majah 1:557. 


Stirah 2, Al-Baqarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 509 


wives) while you are in I'tikaf in the Masjids. These are the 
limits (set) by Allah, so approach them not. Thus does Allah 
make clear His Aydt to mankind that they may acquire Taqwa .> 


Eating, Drinking and Sexual Intercourse are allowed 
during the Nights of Ramadan 


These Aydt contain a relief from Allah for the Muslims by 
ending the practice that was observed in the early years of 
Islam. At that time, Muslims were allowed to eat, drink and 
have sexual intercourse only until the ‘sha’ (Night) prayer, 
unless one sleeps before the ‘Isha’ prayer. Those who slept 
before ‘Isha’ or offered the ‘Isha’ prayer, were not allowed to 
drink, eat or sexual intervourse sex until the next night. The 
Muslims found that to be difficult for them. 

The Aydt used the word ‘Rafath’ to indicate sexual 
intercourse, according to Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Ata’ and Mujahid. 
Similar Tafsir was offered by Said bin Jubayr, Tawas, Salim 
bin ‘Abdullah, ‘Amr bin Dinar, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Az-Zuhri, 
Ad-Dahhak, Ibrahim An-Nakhai, As-Suddi, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani 
and Mugatil bin Hayyan.!! 

Allah said: 


56 0) 2 Soa 


<They are Libas [i.e., body-cover, or screen] for you and you 
are Libas for them .> 
Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, Sa‘id bin Jubayr, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 
As-Suddi and Mugatil bin Hayyan said that this Ayah means, 
“Your wives are a resort for you and you for them.”2! Ar-Rabi‘ 
bin Anas said, “They are your cover and you are their 
cover.”9! In short, the wife and the husband are intimate and 
have sexual intercourse with each other, and this is why they 
were permitted to have sexual activity during the nights of 
Ramadan, so that matters are made easier for them. 
Abu Ishaq reported that Al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib said, “When the 
Companions of Allah’s Messenger # observed fast but would 
sleep before breaking their fast, they would continue fasting 


"'! thn Abi Hatim 1:367-371. 
2! Tbn Abi Hatim 1:370. 
13] Ibn Abi Hatim 1:371. 


510 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


until the following night. Qays bin Sirmah Al-Ansari was fasting 
one day and was working in his land. When the time to break 
the fast came, he went to his wife and said, ‘Do you have food?’ 
She said, ‘No. But I could try to get you some.’ His eyes then 
were overcome by sleep and when his wife came back, she 
found him asleep. She said, ‘Woe unto you! Did you sleep?’ In 
the middle of the next day, he lost consciousness and 
mentioned what had happened to the Prophet 3%. Then, this 
Ayah was revealed: 


€KIGs Hy 01 Aa oS pad 
it is made lawful for you to have sexual relations with your 
wives on the night of As-Siyam (fasting)> 
until... 
rt &e GM LN & CaM SB SES WAG Usd 
¢and eat and drink until the white thread (light) of dawn 


appears to you distinct from the black thread (darkness of 
night), then complete your fast till the nightfall .> 


Consequently, they were very delighted.”""! 

Al-Bukhari reported this Hadith by Abu Ishaq who related that he 
heard Al-Bara’ say, “When fasting Ramadan was ordained, 
Muslims used to refrain from sleeping with their wives the 
entire month, but some men used to deceive themselves. Allah 
revealed: 


CRs thes KE OG Ea SHC LS peel it pled 


¢Allah knows that you used to deceive yourselves, so He turned 
to you (accepted your repentance) and forgave you.»'?! 


‘Ali bin Abu Talhah narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “During 
the month of Ramadan, after Muslims would pray ‘sha’, they 
would not touch their women and food until the next night. 
Then some Muslims, including ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, touched 
(had sex with) their wives and had some food during Ramadan 
after ‘Isha’. They complained to Allah's Messenger 2. Then 
Allah sent down: 


() At-Tabari 3:495. 
(2) Fath AL-Bari 8:30. 


Sitirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 511 
Allah knows that you used to deceive yourselves, so He turned 
to you (accepted your repentance) and forgave you. So now 
have sexual relations with them>” 
This is the same narration that Al-‘Awfi related from Ibn 
‘Abbas.|"! 
Allah said: 
ESS til CEES > 
€...and seek that which Allah has ordained for you 
(offspring),> 
Abu Hurayrah, Ibn ‘Abbas, Anas, Shurayh Al-Qadi, Mujahid, 
Tkrimah, Said bin Jubayr, ‘Ata’, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, As-Suddi, 
Zayd bin Aslam, Hakam bin ‘Utbah, Mudatil bin Hayyan, Al- 
Hasan Al-Basri, Ad-Dahhak, Qatddah, and others said that 
this Ayah refers to having offspring.'?] Qatadah said that the 
Ayah means, “Seek the permission that Allah has allowed for 
you.” Said narrated that Qatadah said, 
qi af Ev ep 
and seek that which Allah has ordained for you ,> 


Time for Suhdr 


Allah said: 
Z vet th Pad Moses a “ett? one e rok 20 erty Yee vores Se 6 rote the 
Ss fot HT 3 ait y MI Lg Boh SEH ES KS Uc > 


qui 
€...and eat and drink until the white thread (light) of dawn 
appears to you distinct from the black thread (darkness of 
night), then complete your fast till the nightfall.» 

Allah has allowed eating and drinking, along with having 
sexual intercourse, as we have stated, during any part of the 
night until the light of dawn is distinguished from the 
darkness of the night. Allah has described that time as 
‘distinguishing the white thread from the black thread.’ He 


(1) At-Tabari 3 :496-498. 
71 ton Abi Hatim 1:377-378, and At-Tabari 3 :506-507. 


512 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


then made it clearer when He said: 
<a > 
¢of dawn .> 
As stated in a Hadith that Imam Abu ‘Abdullah Al-Bukhdari 


recorded, Sahl bin Sa‘d said, “When the following verse was 
revealed: 


551 LE & GaN SB BE & Wests Wd 
<Eat and drink until the white thread appears to you, distinct 
from the black thread> 


and ¢of dawn} was not revealed, some people who intended to 
fast, tied black and white threads to their legs and went on 
eating till they differentiated between the two. Allah then 
revealed the words, ¢of dawn}, and it became clear to them that 
it meant (the darkness of) night and (the light of) day.”!!! 

Al-Bukhari recorded that Ash-Sha‘bi said that ‘Adi said, “I 
took two strings, one black and the other white and kept them 
under my pillow and went on looking at them throughout the 
night, but could not make any distinction between the two. 
So, the next morning I went to Allah’s Messenger 3% and told 
him the whole story. He said: 


edge, 5535545 Jag bh Se SF Jay 1 Soe, Op 
Your pillow is very wide if the white and black threads are 
under it!v'?l 
Some wordings for this Hadith read, 
«Your Qafa (back side of your neck) is wide!»'*) 


Some people said that these words meant that ‘Adi was not 
smart. This is a weak opinion. The narration that Al-Bukhari 
collected explains this part of the Hadith. Al-Bukhari recorded 
that ‘Adi bin Hatim narrated: I said, “O Messenger of Allah! 
What is the white thread from the black thread? Are they 


0) Fath Al-Bari 8:31. 
2) Ibid. 
(31 Ibid. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 513 
actual] threads?” He said: 
Pes Si Ae Se Set 3 Ga Sa ai 
ayes 


‘Your Qafa is wide if you see the two threads. Rather, they are 
the blackness of the night and the whiteness of the daylight 0!" 


Suhar 7! is recommended 


Allah allowed eating and drinking until dawn, it represents 
proof that Suhur is encouraged, since it is a Rukhsah 
(concession or allowance) and Allah likes that the Rukhsah is 
accepted and implemented. The authentic Sunnah indicates 
that eating the Suhdr is encouraged. It is reported in the Two 
Sahihs that Anas narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 


0255 yt 3 OP Ly Ach 
tEat the Sulnir, for there is a blessing in Suhur 1! 
Muslim reported that ‘Amr bin Al-‘As narrated that Allah’s 
Messenger 3 said: 
tN Ii Sus al pes ate By pad bpp 
‘The distinction between our fast and the fast of the People of 
the Book is the meal of Subir »'“\ 
Imam Ahmad reported that Abu Sa‘id narrated that Allah’s 
Messenger #% said: 
S39) HI OB ag des E585 ESSE Gy I 2e SG te Ui b ke 
Sy PEN ole a shad 
«Suluir is a blessed meal. Hence, do not abandon it, even if one 


just takes a sip of water. Indeed, Allah and His angels send 
Salah (blessings) upon those who eat Suhiir.»!>) 


There are several other Hadiths that encourage taking the 


(1) thid. 

(2) Fath Al-Bari 4:165 and Muslim 2:770. 
(31 Muslim 2:77). 

(4 Ahmad 3:44. 

(5! Predawn meal taken before fasting. 


514 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Suhiur, even if it only consists of a sip of water. 

It is preferred that Suhir be delayed until the time of dawn. 
It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Anas bin M4lik narrated 
that Zayd bin Thabit said, “We had Suhur with Allah’s 
Messenger 3£ and then went on to pray.” Anas asked, “How 
much time was there between the Adhdn (call to prayer) and 
the Suhtr?” He said, “The time that fifty Aydt take (to 
recite)."1) 

Imam Ahmad recorded Abu Dharr saying that Allah’s 
Messenger 3 said: 


6X40 3h sbi lke oS, Abie. 


«My Ummah will always retain goodness as long as they 
hasten in breaking the fast and delay the Subir .s!?! 


There are several Hadiths that narrate that the Prophet 3% 
called Suhdr “the blessed meal.” 

There are narrations from several of the Salaf that they 
allowed the Suhir to be eaten later until close to Fajr. This is 
is reported from Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Ali, Ibn Mas‘dd, 
Hudhayfah, Abu Hurayrah, Ibn ‘Umar, Ibn ‘Abb&s and Zayd 
bin Thabit. It is also reported from many of the Tabi‘in, such 
as Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin Husayn, Abu Mijlaz, Ibrahim An- 
Nakhai, Abu Ad-Duha, Abu Wa’il and other companions of 
Ibn Mas‘ud. This is also the opinion of ‘Ata’, Al-Hasan, Hakam 
bin Uyainah, Mujahid, Urwah bin Az-Zubayr, Abu Sha‘tha’ 
Jabir bin Zayd, Al- A‘mash and Ma‘mar bin Rashid. We have 
mentioned the chains of narrations for their statements in our 
(Ibn Kathir’s) book about Siydm (Fasting), and all praise is due 
to Allah. 

It is also recorded in the Two Sahihs that Al-Qasim said that 
‘A'ishah narrated that Allah’s Messenger # said: 


SE Wishig 115 seh soli Ob pSyne $2 Ju Gul sti Ye 
Cpa ahs 2s Bg V Oe op tk af ogi Sf toss 
‘The Adhan pronounced by Bilal should not stop you from 


taking Suhur, for he pronounces the Adhan at night. Hence, 
eat and drink until you hear the Adhan by Ibn Umm Maktim, 


(1) Fath Al-Bari 4:164 and Muslim 2:771. 
(2) Ahmad 5:147. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) $15 


for he does not call the Adhén until dawn 
This is the wording collected by Al-Bukhari. 
Imam Ahmad reported that Qays bin Talq quoted from his 
father that Allah’s Messenger #% said: 
ea J2 fall 535 BM A je a och 
‘Dawn is not the (ascending) glow of white light of the 
horizon. Rather, it is the red (radiating) light .»'! 
Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi also recorded this Hadith, but 
their wording is: 
Sek Sys AS ath bu Sig Vy ody Uke 


wei 
3 


«Eat and drink and do not be rushed by the ascending (white) 
light. Eat and drink until the redness (of the dawn) appears.»'*! 


Ibn Jarir (At-Tabari) recorded that Samurah bin Jundub 
narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 


eps 2 - Lio td - Gatch ds V5 yok Sf i 
‘Do not be stopped by Bilal’s Adhan or the (ascending) 
whiteness, until it spreads .»'| 
Muslim also recorded this Hadith.'5! 


There is no Harm in beginning the Fast while Junub (a 
state of major ritual impurity) 


Issue: Among the benefits of allowing sexual activity, eating 
and drinking until dawn for those who are fasting, is that it is 
allowed to start the fast while Junub (in the state of impurity 
after sexual discharge), and there is no harm in this case if 
one takes a bath any time in the morning after waking up, 
and completes the fast. This is the opinion of the Four Imams 
and the majority of the scholars. Al-Bukhari and Muslim 
recorded that ‘Aiishah and Umm Salamah said that Allah’s 


(| Fath Al-Bari 4:162, and Muslim 2:768. 
[21 Ahmad 4:23. 

31 Tubfat ALAhwadhi 3 :389. 

4] At-Tabari 3:517. 

IS] Muslim 2:769. 


516 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Messenger 3% used to wake up while Junub from sexual 
intercourse, not wet dreams, and he would take a bath and 
fast. Umm Salamah added that he would not break his fast or 
make up for that day! 
Muslim recorded that ‘A’ishah said that a man asked: 
hye eat O25 OU eo She hy Sa oS Ett 45 
tel C22 hy Seas $45 
“O Messenger of Allah! The (Dawn) prayer time starts while I 
am Junub, should | fast?” Allah’s Messenger 3 replied, «And 
I. The prayer time starts while | am Junub and I fast 
He said, “You are not like us, O Messenger of Allah! Allah 
has forgiven your previous and latter sins.” Allah’s Messenger 
#8 said: 
1B ey KALEI ao SULTS ST OT 25S GA aga 
«By Allah! I hope that I have the most fear from Allah among 
you and the best knowledge of what Taqwa is.0'! 


Fasting ends at Sunset 
Allah said: 
435i 3h peas Hl > 
<...then complete your fast till the nightfall .> 


This Ayah orders breaking the fast at sunset. It is recorded 
in the Two Sahihs that Umar bin Al-Khattab said that Allah’s 
Messenger 3% said: 


erste hil Ai CGS Sy. Ste 55T5 Ces Se Sahn at bp 
lf the night comes from this direction (the east), and the day 


departs from that direction (the west), then the fasting person 
breaks his fast.s!°) 


It is reported that Sahl bin Sa‘d As-Sa‘idi narrated that 
Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 
chal lke G 2 1 dG Ye 


(1) Fath Al-Bari 4:182 and Muslim 2:781. 
(2) Muslim 2:781. 
(31 Fath AL-Bari 4:231 and Muslim 2 :772. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 517 


‘The people will retain goodness as long as they hasten in 
breaking the fast .o!!| 
Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Hurayrah narrated that the 
Prophet 2% said: 


ches phsel hh cote Cet bn sey G2 an Ub 
‘Allah the Exalted said, ‘The dearest among My servants to Me 
are those who hasten in breaking the fast the most.’s!?) 


At-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith and said that this Hadith is 
Hasan Gharib.'3! 


Prohibition of Uninterrupted Fasting (Wisdal) 

There are several authentic Hadiths that prohibit Al-Wisdl, 
which means continuing the fast through the night to the next 
night, without eating. Imam Ahmad recorded Abu Hurayrah 
saying that Allah’s Messenger # said: 

Sad Jt pK, Sh A DG etd Gh at Stu de Leg 
8 gB55 25 conkt! 
‘Do not practice Al-Wisdl in fasting.» So, they said to him, 
“But you practice Al-Wisdl, O Allah’s Messenger!” The 
Prophet #% replied, “«I am not like you, I am given food and 
drink during my sleep by my Lord.» 
So, when the people refused to stop Al-Wisdl, the Prophet 3% 
fasted two days and two nights (along with those who practiced 


Wisa) and then they saw the crescent moon (of the month of 
Shawwal). The Prophet # said to them (angrily): 


S835 Jvigh 26 sh 
ulf the crescent had not appeared, I would have made you fast 
for a longer period.» 
That was as a punishment for them (when they refused to 


stop practicing Al-Wisa).'41 This Hadith is also recorded in the 
Sahihayn. 


0) Fath Al-Bari 4:234 and Muslim 2:771. 

(21 Ahmad 2 :237. 

31 Twhfat ALAhwadhi 3 :386. 

(41 Ahmad 2:281, Fath Al-Bari 4:238, and Muslim 2:774. 


518 Tafsir Ibn_Kathir 


The prohibition of Al-Wisdl was also mentioned in a number 
of other narrations. It is a fact that practicing Al-Wisdl was 
one of the special qualities of the Prophet #, for he was 
capable and assisted in his practice of it. It is obvious that the 
food and drink that the Prophet 3 used to get while practicing 
AL-Wisal was spiritual and not material, otherwise he would not 
be practicing Al-Wisdl. We should mention that it is allowed to 
refrain from breaking the fast from sunset until before dawn 
(Suhary. A Hadith narrated by Abu Sa‘id Khudri states that 
Allah’s Messenger 34 said: 


cS MN Leth eng of sgl 26 i loigt ve 
‘Do not practice Al-Wisal, but whoever wishes is allowed to 
practice it until the Sultir. 
They said, “You practice Al-Wisal, O Messenger of Allah!” He 

said: 

«I am not similar to you, for | have One Who makes me eat 

and drink during the night.» 
This Hadith is also collected in the Two Sahihs|!! 


The Rulings of I‘tikaf 
Allah said: 
<5 oN 3 SpS ea AS BAS 5 


¢And do not have sexual relations with them (your wives) while 

you are in I'tikaf in the Masjids.> 

‘Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “This 
Ayah is about the man who stays in I'tikaf at the mosque 
during Ramadan or other months, Allah prohibited him from 
touching (having sexual intercourse with) women, during the 
night or day, until he finishes his /‘tikaf.”7!_ Ad-Dahhak said, 
“Formerly, the man who practiced I‘tikaf would go out of the 
mosque and, if he wished, would have sexual intercourse (with 
his wife). Allah then said: 


Sait 3 Spe NS cays Isp 
(l Fath Al-Bari 4:338. 
[2] At-Tabari 3 :540. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 519 


¢And do not have sexual relations with them (your wives) while 
you are in Itikdf in the Masjids.> 


meaning, ‘Do not touch your .wives as long as you are in 
I'tikaf, whether you were in the mosque or outside of it’! It 
is also the opinion of Mujahid, Qatadah and several other 
scholars, that the Muslims used to have sexual intercourse 
with the wife while in I‘tikaf if they departed the mosque until 
the Ayah was revealed.'?) Ibn Abu Hatim commented, “It was 
reported that Ibn Mas‘Ad, Muhammad bin Ka‘b, Mujahid, ‘Ata’ 
Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas 
and Mugatil said that the Ayah means, ‘Do not touch the wife 
while in ['tikaf.’”"! 

What Ibn Abu Hatim reported from these people is the 
agreed upon practice among the scholars. Those who are in 
I'tikaf are not allowed to have sexual intercourse as long as 
they are still in I‘tikaf in the mosque. If one has to leave the 
mosque to attend to a need, such as to relieve the call of 
nature or to eat, he is not allowed to kiss or embrace his wife 
or to busy himself with other than his /‘tikaf. He is not even 
allowed to visit ailing persons, but he can merely ask about 
their condition while passing by. I‘tikaf has several other 
rulings that are explained in the books (of Figh), and we have 
mentioned several of these rulings at the end of our book on 
Siyam (Fasting), all praise is due to Allah. Furthermore, the 
scholars of Figh used to follow their explanation of the rules 
for fasting with the explanation of the rules for I‘tikdaf, as this 
is the way these acts of worship were mentioned in the 
Qur’an. 

By mentioning /‘tikdf after fasting, Allah draws attention to 
practicing [‘tikaf during the month of the fast, especially the 
last part of the month. The Sunnah of Allah’s Messenger 3% is 
that he used to perform I‘tikaf during the last ten nights of the 
month of Ramadan until he died. Afterwards, the Prophet’s 
wives used to perform I‘tikaf as the Two Sahihs recorded from 
‘Alishah the Mother of the believers."“! 


(WN At-Tabari 3:541. 

7) At-Tabari 3:541. 

(3) thn Abi Hatim 1:385-387. 

(41 Fath Al-Bari 4:318 and Muslim 2:831. 


520 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Safiyyah, the daughter 
of Huyai, went to Allah’s Messenger #% to visit him in the 
mosque while he was in I‘tikdf. She had a talk with him for a 
while, then she got up in order to return home. The Prophet #4 
accompanied her back home, as it was night. Her house was at 
Usamah bin Zayd’s house on the edge of Al-Madinah. While 
they were walking, two Ansari men met them and passed by 
them in a hurry, for they were shy to bother the Prophet 
while he was walking with his wife. He told them: 


‘Do not run away! She is (my wife) Safiyyah bint Huyai.» 


Both of them said, “All praise is due to Allah, (How dare we 

think of any evil) O Allah’s Messenger!” The Prophet #% said (to 

them): 

Sg Ge SP Lk hy eb opts 6 ol oe gfe Sth itp 
aes JSG i Pasa 


«‘Shaytan reaches everywhere in the human body, that the blood 
reaches. I was afraid lest Shaytan might suggest an evil thought 
in your minds.3!)) 


Imam Ash-Shafii commented, “Allah’s Messenger 3% sought 
to teach his Ummah to instantly eliminate any evil thought, so 
that they do not fall into the prohibited. They (the two Ansari 
men) had more fear of Allah than to think evil of the Prophet 
3%. Allah knows best.” 

The Ayah (2:187) prohibits sexual intercourse and anything 
like kissing or embracing that might lead to it during I‘tikdf. 
As for having the wife helping the husband, it is allowed. It is 
reported in the Two Sahihs that ‘A’ishah said, “Allah’s 
Messenger # would bring his head near me (in her room) and | 
would comb his hair, while I was on my menses. He would 
enter the room only to attend to what a man needs.”?! 


Allah’s statement: 
€ il 5532 Ghs> 


"1 Fath AL-Bari 4:326 and Muslim 4:1712. 
[2] Fath Al-Bari 4:320 and Muslim 1:244. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 521 


<These are the limits (set) by Allah> 

means, This is what We have explained, ordained, specified, 
allowed and prohibited for fasting. We also mentioned the 
fast’s objectives, what is permitted during it, and what is 
required of it. These are the set limits that Allah has legislated 
and explained, so do not come near them or transgress them.’ 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said, “(Allah’s set limits 
mentioned in the Ayah) mean these four limits (and he then 
recited): 


GG 5 SS sat ped LD 
€It is made lawful for you to have sexual relations with your 
wives on the night of As-Siyam (fasting) .> 
and he recited up to: 
4351 3, Aa ST Bp 
<then complete your Sawm (fast) till the nightfall .> 


My father and other’s used to say similarly and recite the 
same Ayah to us.” 


Allah said: 
4d occ. Gf 2 he wT > 


ore 


<Thus does Allah make clear His Ayat to mankind> 


meaning, ‘Just as He explains the fast and its rulings, He also 
explains the other rulings by the words of His servant and 
Messenger, Muhammad 32.’ Allah continues: 


423 EI > 


<to mankind that they may attain Taqwa.> 
meaning, ‘So that they know how to acquire the true guidance 
and how to worship (Allah).’ Similarly, Allah said: 
Ko oy oot hy el GS A oe oo a ER dl a 
€° G one SJ 
<It is He Who sends down manifest Aydt to His servant 
(Muhammad #3) that He may bring you out from (types of) 


darkness into the light. And verily, Allah is to you full of 
kindness, Most Merciful.> (57:9) 


522 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


JA 4 Gf iets Ei Jy Ge ds gut, Ke Kind ORE sp 
Cols 2G AYE tht 
€188. And eat up not one another's property unjustly (in any 
illegal way, e.g., stealing, robbing, deceiving), nor give bribery 
to the rulers (judges before presenting your cases) that you may 
knowingly eat up a part of the property of others sinfully .> 


Bribery is prohibited and is a Sin 


‘Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “This 
(Ayah 2:188) is about the indebted person when there is no 
evidence of the loan. So he denies taking the loan and the 
case goes to the authorities, even though he knows that it is 
not his money and that he is a sinner, consuming what is not 
allowed for him.”') This opinion was also reported from 
Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As- 
Suddi, Mugatil bin Hayan and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin 
Aslam. They all stated, “Do not dispute when you know that 
you are being unjust.”?! 


The Judge’s Ruling does not allow the Prohibited or 
prohibit the Lawful 


It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Umm Salamah narrated 
that Allah’s Messenger said: 


be sty SSS 55 Sf kay fb ed ok uly Gh of vi 
of of 0 ute te Bt “ht oF he FT Pes oot Ad ee 
3) Glad 28 bp ahd oe EB htt Ga, SS 5d gail ay 

ieee! 
«fam only human! You people present your cases to me, and 
as some of you may be more eloquent and persuasive in 
presenting his argument, I might issue a judgment in his 


benefit. So, if I give a Muslim's right to another, I am really 
giving him a piece of fire; so he should not take it.»'°! 


The Ayah and the Hadith prove that the judgment of the 


(1 At-Tabari 3:550. 
21 Ibn Abi Hatim 1 :393-394, and At-Tabari 3:550-551. 
(31 Fath ALBari 13:190, and Muslim 3:1373. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagaralt (175 - 200) (Part-2 523 


authorities in any case does not change the reality of the truth. 
Hence, the ruling does not allow what is in fact prohibited or 
prohibit what is in fact allowed. It is only applicable in that 
case. So if the ruling agrees with the truth, then there is no 
harm in this case. Otherwise, the judge will acquire his reward, 
while the cheater will acquire the evil burden. 

This is why Allah said: 


Joly Gs tata Wed! 4G, USS gull KE KG OE ip 
nS LS coh JYt tut 


¢And eat up not one another's property unjustly, nor give 
bribery to the rulers (judges before presenting your cases) that 
you may knowingly eat up a part of the property of others 
sinfully.» 
meaning, ‘While you know the falsehood of what you claim.’ 
Qatadah said, “O son of Adam! Know that the judge’s ruling 
does not allow you what is prohibited or prohibit you from 
what is allowed. The judge only rules according to his best 
judgment and according to the testimony of the witnesses. The 
judge is only human and is bound to make mistakes. Know 
that if the judge erroneously rules in some one’s favor, then 
that person will still encounter the dispute when the disputing 
parties meet Allah on the Day of Resurrection. Then, the 
unjust person will be judged swiftly and precisely with that 
which will surpass whatever he acquired by the erroneous 
judgment he received in the life of this world.”!!! 


SA HE A A Sib we days @ BLY gy Ges BD 
eal ait 15 5 A & nil ib Aa on A ES Le 

i ph 
4189. They ask you (O Muhammad) about the crescents. Say: 
“These are signs to mark fixed periods of time for mankind and 
for the pilgrimage.” It is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness, etc.) 
that you enter the houses from the back, but Al-Birr is from 


Taqwa. So enter houses through their proper doors, and have 
Taqwa of Allah that you may be successful .> 


(1 At-Tabari 3:550. 


524 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


The Crescent Moons 


Al-‘Awfi related that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The people asked 
Allah’s Messenger #% about the crescent moons. Thereafter, 
this Ayah was revealed: 


qs E55 ob Ng Head 

€They ask you (O Muhammad) about the crescents. Say, 

“These are signs to mark fixed periods of time for mankind...> 
so that they mark their acts of worship, the ‘iddah (the period 
of time a divorced woman or a widow is required to wait before 
remarrying) of their women and the time of their Hajj 
(pilgrimage to Makkah).”") ‘Abdur-Razzaq reported that Ibn 
‘Umar narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


ce OB oth) iil oth) Ityad tl Sigs AG Gar gare 
(By Bou yaad woe 
‘Allah has made the crescents signs to mark fixed periods of 
time for mankind. Hence,: fast on seeing it (the crescent for 
Ramadan) and break the fast on seeing it (the crescent for 


Shawwal). If it (the crescent) was obscure to you then count 
thirty days (mark that month as thirty days).»!?) 


This Hadith was also collected by Al-Hakim in his 
Mustadrak, and he said, “The chain is Sahih, and they (Al- 
Bukhari and Muslim) did not recorded it."!*! 


Righteousness comes from Taqwa 


Allah said: 
be Sandi BG MSI A ESS Ae oe Seat HE SL Lat pats> 


Siar 
€lt is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness, etc.) that you enter the 
houses from the back, but Al-Birr is from Taqwa. So enter 
houses through their proper doors .> 


Al-Bukhari recorded that Al-Bara’ said, “During the time of 


0) At-Tabari 3:554. 
(2 ‘Abdur-Razzaq 4:156. 
IS} Al-Hakim 1 :423. 


Sttrah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 525 


Jahiliyyah, they used to enter the house from the back upon 
assuming the Ihram. Thereafter, Allah revealed (the following 
Ayah): 


bs al hy Bat oe SS ESS LS oe Stati BEE SL 5M Sa> 


iii 


it is not Al-Birr (piety, righteousness, etc.) that you enter the 
houses from the back but Al-Birr is from Taqwa. So enter 
houses through their proper doors.>!"! 


Abu Dawud At-Taydlisi recorded the same Hadith from Al- 

ara’ but with the wording; “The Ansar used to enter their 
houses from the back when returning from a journey. 
Thereafter, this Ayah (2:189 above) was revealed...” 

Al-Hasan said, “When some people during the time of 
Jahiliyyah would leave home to travel, and then decide not to 
travel, they would not enter the house from its door. Rather, 
they would climb over the back wall. Allah the Exalted said: 


€ Ba on SHA HEL, a> 
¢lt is not Al-Birr (pie yy, righteousness) that you enter the 
houses from the back,>.”"°I 
Allah’s statement: 


pls eal i ait 1 555> 
¢...and have a of Allah that you may be successful.> 


Have Taqwa of Allah, means to do what He has commanded 
you and refrain from what He has forbidden for you, 


ph cay 
¢that you may be successful .> 


tomorrow when you stand before Him and He thus rewards 
you perfectly. 

pith MSL tt Yat Oy) OES I KE Soll il So 3 155> 
F bli settle At Yh Sail Ge at easy ie bs & taph as oS 
Nl Fath Al-Bari 8:310. 

21 Musnad At-Taydlisi, 98. 

(31 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:401. 


526 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Pear Nats 4 Ue s in Ped ¢ 2s 
iN ¥ fae asst SKS oS ta Sh 


Bee ca, a Le cd PBST Boe od D8S¢, ) 


. ‘, dated wr ee FS o ° c 
RAN BAL Ui hom p ly ppcai doe pascal iil of WEST TE aS 
ot hin 


eee of Cowes “if 
- Seg ote ite oe 
pastthy OMT aa ane abt Of 


PARE plait iehlet aloes 
BEUTLER EC ERE Sts Toe ae cee ee cee 
POD GATES asi cobes |S gut sky AKT & 
SSGERSSE BLS BD RIESE | ey ask % GET of 
Ze Pople vere o + ihe oe 
eA BiG MEY 5 256 Glob ad, €or Si 
pals €190. And fight in the 
eerie hens, econ is || way of Allah those who 
WLS ae Gad fight you, but transgress 
MABY ofc al ash @ Sadi not the limits. Truly, 
fe ccoteecttta fe dm. cates t.cez ets oq. || Allah likes not — the 
avabaltal isl aaliy tols transgressors .> 
“ie Scare IO THUG (a be nesl5G a . And fa ee 
ee tee tE hee th ce eStc uct, || Wherever you find them, 
Sibeaenl coi Shey | a? peei6u dale Gall and turn them out from 
Fi 5S 75 EATS Ca ict... || where they have turned 
aes ree eee || you out. And ALFitnah 
pegs Wet Lasag is worse than killing. 
AA eke fh HS ELSES ites 1% |] And fight not with them 
SAE SM KGS de ie aie: at Al-Masjid Al-Haraim 
(the sanctuary at Mak- 
kah), unless they (first) 
fight you there. But if they attack you, then kill them. Such is the 
recompense of the disbelievers.> 
4192. But if they cease, then Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.> 
€193. And fight them until there is no more Fitnah (disbelief and 
worshipping of others along with Allah) and the religion (all and every 
kind of worship) is for Allah (Alone). But if they cease, let there be no 
transgression except against Az-Zalimin (the polytheists and 
wrongdoers) .» 


4 


ge Zev A ser’ 


is Aidt, ss MN Gleth atab erl ; if 


The Command to fight Those Who fight Muslims and 
killing Them wherever They are found 


Abu Ja‘far Ar-Razi said that Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said that Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah commented on what Allah said: 


CHAE oll uc g 185) 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 527 


<And fight in the way of Allah those who fight you,> 


Abu Al-‘Aliyah said, “This was the first Ayah about fighting 
that was revealed in Al-Madinah. Ever since it was revealed, 
Allah’s Messenger 3% used to fight only those who fought him 
and avoid non-combatants. Later, Surat Barda’ah (chapter 9 in 
the Qur’an) was revealed.”') ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin 
Aslam said similarly, then he said that this was later abrogated 
by the Ayah: EadMretained stake ates 

CAysas ES OSE LAst> 
<then kill them wherever you find them> (9:5). 
However, this statement is not cei because Allah’s 


statement: 2 24 
(SS a 


¢...those who it you> 
applies only to fighting the enemies who are engaged in 
fighting Islam and its people. So the Ayah means, ‘Fight those 
who fight you’, just as Allah said (in another Ayah): 
ia oa ove £te “4° 
(ee KGL ide 43 6 SS icii Vas55 
..and fight against the Mushrikin collectively as they fight 
pi you collectively .>'?! (9:36) 
This is why Allah said later in the Ayah: 
Cheol ds i htt Sous os Ap 
¢And kill them wherever you find them, and turn them out 
from where they have turned you out.> 


meaning, ‘Your energy should be spent on fighting them, just 
as their energy is spent on fighting you, and on expelling them 
from the areas from which they have expelled you, as a law of 
equality in punishment.’ 


The Prohibition of mutilating the Dead and stealing 
from the captured Goods 
Allah said: 
4662 2 Y Gi Sy GS I> 
"'l At-Tabari 3:561. 
7) At-Tabari 3 :562. 


528 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<but transgress not the limits. Truly, Allah likes not the 
transgressors .> 


This Ayah means, ‘Fight for the sake of Allah and do not be 
transgressors,’ such as, by committing prohibitions. Al-Hasan 
Al-Basri stated that transgression (indicated by the Ayah), 
“includes mutilating the dead, theft (from the captured goods), 
killing women, children and old people who do not participate 
in warfare, killing priests and residents of houses of worship, 
burning down trees and killing animals without real benefit.” 
This is also the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Aziz, 
Muqatil bin Hayyan and others. Muslim recorded in his Sahih 
that Buraydah narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 


tgs V5 15a V5 1S V5 281 dbl 5 tf Ub ail de of Wiel? 
teal jall ST V5 dy LE 5 
‘Fight for the sake of Allah and fight those who disbelieve in 
Allah. Fight, but do not steal (from the captured goods), 
commit treachery, mutilate (the dead), or kill a child, or those 
who reside in houses of worship .»") 
It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Ibn ‘Umar said, “A 
woman was found dead during one of the Prophet’s battles 


and the Prophet # then forbade killing women and 
children.” There are many other Hadiths on this subject. 


Shirk is worse than Killing 


Since Jihdd involves killing and shedding the blood of men, 
Allah indicated that these men are committing disbelief in 
Allah, associating with Him (in the worship) and hindering from 
His path, and this is a much greater evil and more disastrous 
than killing. Abu Malik commented about what Allah said: 


ial Sh EG» 
¢And Al-Fitnah is worse than killing .> 


Meaning what you (disbelievers) are committing is much worse 
than killing.”*! Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, 


[l Muslim 3:1357. 
[2] Fath Al-Bari 6:172 and Muslim 3:1364. 
'3) fbn Abi Hatim 1:412. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 529 
Tkrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak and Ar-Rabi‘ bin 
Anas said that what Allah said: 

¢And Al-Fitnah is worse than killing .> 
“Shirk (polytheism) is worse than killing.” 


Fighting in the Sacred Area is prohibited, except in Self- 
Defense 


Allah said: 
Cl al Se Ah SD 
¢And fight not with them at Al-Masjid Al-Haram (the 
sanctuary at Makkah)» 

It is reported in the Two Sahihs that the Prophet #& said: 
CA aN A FS 58 Sets Sight GLE Gy il 5s A as Op 
OBA Me Bh ge BG OW fe BE NY hei ly tl oy 
JER Gat LSE OE gy hb Lay ud ogy 

weXi SS Hy ohh) Sah a op 18 aes at 125 
‘Allah has made this city a sanctuary since the day He created 
the heavens and the earth. So, it is a sanctuary by Allah’s 
decree till the Day of Resurrection. Fighting in it was made 
legal for me only for an hour in the daytime. So, it (i.e., 
Makkah) is a sanctuary, by Allah's decree, from now on until 
the Day of Resurrection. Its trees should not be cut, and its 
grass should not be uprooted. If anyone mentions the fighting 


in it that occurred by Allah’s Messenger, then say that Allah 
allowed His Messenger, but did not allow you .»!"| 


In this Hadith, Allah’s Messenger # mentions fighting the 
people of Makkah when he conquered it by force, leading to 
some deaths among the polytheists in the area of the 
Khandamah. This occurred after the Prophet # proclaimed: 


oles ua 313 Jes Lay oSel yi dota)! SES Bnd Sel 3g OU Gel Sn 


(1 Fath Al-Bari 6:327 and Muslim 2 :986-987. 


530 Tafsir _Ibn_ Kathir 


tWhoever closed his door is safe. Whoever entered the (Sacred) 
Mosque is safe. Whoever entered the house of Abu Sufydn is 
also safe .»!) 


Allah said: 
oe gee ote Ese Bree oe et ben oy oy 
45,365 BSS Vp PONY ba Keni SiS ob 43 ¢ he i" ad 


«...unless they (first) fight you there. But if they attack you, 
then kill them. Such is the recompense of the disbelievers.> 


Allah states: ‘Do not fight them in the area of the Sacred 
Mosque unless they start fighting you in it. In this case, you 
are allowed to fight them and kill them to stop their 
aggression.’ Hence, Allah’s Messenger # took the pledge from 
his Companions under the tree (in the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah) 
to fight (the polytheists), after the tribes of Quraysh and their 
allies, Thaqif and other groups, collaborated against the 
Muslims (to stop them from entering Makkah to visit the 
Sacred House). Then, Allah stopped the fighting before it 
started between them and said: 


ek KAN Is & oh he BG Ke cad Holt 3, 
€And He it is Who has withheld their hands from you and your 


hands from them in the midst of Makkah, after He had made 
you victors over them.> (48:24) 


and: 

fe i os Kadi AS J A Sak te OF Se, > 
€Had there not been believing men and believing women whom 
you did not know, that you may kill them and on whose 
account a sin would have been committed by you without (your) 
knowledge, that Allah might bring into His mercy whom He 
wills — if they (the believers and the disbelievers) had been 
apart, We verily, would have punished those of them who 
disbelieved with painful torment.> (48:25) 


Allah’s statement: 


(1 Ahmad 2 :292. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 531 


<But if they cease, then Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most 

Merciful .> 
which means, ‘If they (polytheists) cease fighting you in the 
Sacred Area, and come to Islam and repent, then Allah will 
forgive them their sins, even if they had before killed Muslims 
in Allah’s Sacred Area.’ Indeed, Allah’s forgiveness 
encompasses every sin, whatever its enormity, when the sinner 
repents it. 


The Order to fight until there is no more Fitnah 


Allah then commanded fighting the disbelievers when He 

said: 
425 555 ¥ SY 
¢...until there is no more Fitnah> 

meaning, Shirk. This is the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas, Abu Al- 
‘Aliyah, Mujahid, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi‘, Muqatil bin 
Hayyan, As-Suddi and Zayd bin Aslam!!! 

Allah’s statement: 


€4i bail 5S) 
¢...and the religion (all and every kind of worship) is for Allah 
(Alone) .> 


means, ‘So that the religion of Allah becomes dominant above 
all other religions.’ It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Abu 
Masa Al-Ash‘ari said: "The Prophet #% was asked, ‘O Allah’s 
Messenger! A man fights out of bravery, and another fights to 
show off, which of them fights in the cause of Allah?’ The 
Prophet # said: 


tHe who fights so that Allah’s Word is superior, then he fights 
in Allah’s cause.s!?] In addition, it is reported in the Two 
Sahihs: 

ge pat BIE ard ve S oon pul of Spb 


(4! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:415-416. 
(21 Fath Al-Bari 13:450 and Muslim 3:1513. 


532 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


tail Le ellen Uae, Vy pUiisthy bits 
«I have been ordered (by Allah) to fight the people until they 
proclaim, ‘None has the right to be worshipped but Allah’. 
Whoever said it, then he will save his life and property from 
me, oot for cases of the law, and their account will be with 
Allah 0") 
Allah’s statement: 


dina 55% GH GE op 

<But if they cease, let there be no transgression except against 

the wrongdoers .> 
indicates that, If they stop their Shirk and fighting the 
believers, then cease warfare against them. Whoever fights 
them afterwards will be committing an injustice. Verily 
aggression can only be started against the unjust.’ This is the 
meaning of Mujahid’s statement that only combatants should 
be fought.!2! Or, the meaning of the Ayah indicates that, If 
they abandon their injustice, which is Shirk in this case, then 
do not start aggression against them afterwards.’ The 
aggression here means retaliating and fighting them, just as 
Allah said: 

5K eoS8l yh, sk Ue Kee weet 5p 
<Then whoever transgresses against you, you transgress 
likewise against him. (2:194) 
Similarly, Allah said: 
<The recompense for an evil is an evil like thereof.> (42:40), and: 
dy A3e Ch Fs 2c ap 
<And if you punish them, then punish them with the like of 
that with which you were afflicted.> (16:126) 


Tkrimah and Qatadah stated, “The unjust person is he who 
refuses to proclaim, There is no God worthy of worship except 


(1 Fath Al-Bari 1:592 and Muslim 1:53. 
[2] At-Tabari 3 :584. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 533 


Allah’.!! 
Under Allah’s statement: 


425 555 FF LSD 
¢And fight them until there is no more Fitnahp 


Al-Bukhari recorded that Nafi‘ said that two men came to Ibn 
‘Umar during the conflict of Ibn Az-Zubayr and said to him, 
“The people have fallen into shortcomings and you are the son 
of Umar and the Prophet’s Companion. Hence, what prevents 
you from going out?” He said, “What prevents me is that Allah 
has for bidden shedding the blood of my (Muslim) brother.” 
They said, “Did not Allah say: 


CES 55 E BAS 


¢And fight them until there is no more Fitnah (disbelief and 
worshipping of others along with Allah)?” 


He said, “We did fight until there was no more Fitnah and the 
religion became for Allah Alone. You want to fight until there 
is Fitnah and the religion becomes for other than Allah!” 

Uthman bin Salih added that a man came to Ibn Umar and 
asked him, “O Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman! What made you perform 
Hajj one year and ‘Umrah another year and abandon Jihad in 
the cause of Allah, although you know how much He has 
encouraged performing it?” He said, “O my nephew! Islam is 
built on five (pillars): believing in Allah and His Messenger, the 
five daily prayers, fasting Ramadan, paying the Zakah and 
performing Hajj (pilgrimage) to the House.” They said, “O Abu 
‘Abdur-Rahman! Did you not hear what Allah said in His 
Book: 

“0 vA “e ove f. * 


BG MG ety Ss Op ES LAE ET cei & AE app 

tai AS 
¢And if two parties (or groups) among the believers fall to 
fighting, then make peace between them both. But if one of 
them outrages against the other, then fight you (all) against the 
one that which outrages till it complies with the command of 
Allah .> (49:9) and: 


0) At-Tabari 3:573. 


534 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
CES ISS YE A> 
¢And fight them until there is no more Fitnah (disbelief)?> 


He said, “That we did during the time of Allah’s Messenger 
# when Islam was still weak and (the Muslim) man used to 
face trials in his religion, such as killing or torture. When Islam 
became stronger (and apparent), there was no more Fitnah.” He 
asked, “What do you say about ‘Ali and Uthman?” He said, “As 
for Uthman, Allah has forgiven him. However, you hated the 
fact that Allah had forgiven him! As for ‘Ali, he is the cousin of 
Allah’s Messenger # and his son-in-law.” He then pointed with 
his hand, saying, “This is where his house is located (meaning, 
‘so close to the Prophet’s house just as ‘Ali was so close to the 
Prophet 3 satis 1] 


tel i jhe ale Heb Ke eel gS Bis Sol i By pd I> 
CMe Sal Gc di Si tyke i SG Sle 


€194. The sacred month is for the sacred month, and for the 
prohibited things, there is the Law of equality (Qisds). Then 
whoever transgresses against you, you transgress likewise 
against him. And fear Allah, and know that Allah is with Al- 
Muttagin .> 


Fighting during the Sacred Months is prohibited, except 
in Self-Defense 


Ibn ‘Abbas, Ad-Dahhak, As-Suddi, Qatadah, Miqsam, Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas and ‘Ata said, “Allah’s Messenger # went for 
‘Umrah on the sixth year of Hijrah. Then, the idolators 
prevented him from entering the Sacred House (the Ka‘bah in 
Makkah) along with the Muslims who came with him. This 
incident occurred during the sacred month of Dhul-Qa‘dah. The 
idolators agreed to allow them to enter the House the next year. 
Hence, the Prophet #% entered the House the following year, 
along with the Muslims who accompanied him, and Allah 
permitted him to avenge the idolators’ treatment of him, when 
He said: 


1) Fath ALBari 8:32. 


Strah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 535 


das Laks Gs Bh ph Zid 
<The sacred month is for the sacred month, and for the 
prohibited things, there is the Law of equality (Qisés).>!"! 


Imam Ahmad recorded that Jabir bin ‘Abdullah said, “Allah’s 
Messenger #2 would not engage in warfare during the Sacred 
Month unless he was first attacked, then he would march 
forth. He would otherwise remain idle until the end of the 
Sacred Months.” This Hadith has an authentic chain of 
narrators. |? 

Hence, when the Prophet 34 was told that Uthman was killed 
(in Makkah) when he was camped at the area of Al- 
Hudaybiyyah, after he had sent Uthman as his emissary to the 
polytheists, he accepted the pledge from his Companions under 
the tree to fight the polytheists. They were one thousand and 
four hundred then. When the Prophet # was informed that 
‘Uthman was not killed, he abandoned the fight and reverted to 
peace. 

When the Prophet # finished fighting with (the tribes of 
Hawazin during the battle of Hunayn and Hawazin took refuge 
in (the city of} At-Ta’if, he laid siege to that city. Then, the 
(sacred) month of Dhul-Qa‘dah started, while At-Ta'if was still 
under siege. The siege went on for the rest of the forty days 
(rather, from the day the battle of Hunayn started until the 
Prophet # went back to Al-Madinah from Al-Ji‘rdnah, were 
forty days), as reported in the Two Sahihs and narrated by 
Anas. When the Companions suffered mounting casualties 
(during the siege), the Prophet # ended the siege before 
conquering At-Ta'if. He then went back to Makkah, performed 
‘Umrah from Al-Ji'ranah, where he divided the war booty of 
Hunayn. This ‘Umrah occurred during Dhul-Qa‘dah of the 
eighth year of Al-Hijrah.®! 

Allah’s statement: 


£ oe of Meat eyelet og 
K SBE SSE Jay gihe EE Se leah a> 
¢...whoever transgresses against you, you transgress likewise 


(4 At-Tabari 3:575-577 and 579. 
[2] Ahmad 3:345. 
13] Fath Al-Bari 3:701 and Muslim 2:916. 


536 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


against him .> 


ordains justice even with the polytheists. Allah also said in 
another Ayah: 


diy 252 Ci acs 250 a5) 
¢And if you punish, then punish them with the like of that 
with which you were afflicted .> (16:126) 
Allah’s statement: 
ddl (i Nigtks ai Gasp 
¢And fear Allah, and know that Allah is with Al-Muttagin (the 
pious)> (2:194) 
commands that Allah be obeyed and feared out of Taqwa. The 


Ayah informs us that Allah is with those who have Taqwa by 
His aid and support in this life and the Hereafter. 


€195. And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw 


yourselves into destruction, and do good. Truly, Allah loves 
Al-Muhsinin (those who do good) .> 


The Command to spend in the Cause of Allah 
Al-Bukhari recorded that Hudhayfah said: 


¢And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw yourselves 
into destruction .> 


“It was revealed about spending.”"! Ibn Abu Hatim reported 
him saying similarly. He then commented, "Similar is reported 
from Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, Ikrimah, Said bin Jubayr, ‘Ata’, 
Ad-Dahhak, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Mugéatil bin 
Hayyan.” 

Aslam Abu Imran said, “A man from among the Ansar broke 
enemy (Byzantine) lines in Constantinople (Istanbul). Abu 
Ayyub Al-Ansari was with us then. So some people said, ‘He is 
throwing himself to destruction.’ Abu Ayyub said, ‘We know 


Cl Fath Al-Bari 8:33. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 537 


this Ayah (2:195) better, for it was revealed about us, the 
Companions of Allah’s Messenger #% who participated in Jihad 
with him and aided and supported him. When Islam became 
strong, we, the Ansar, met and said to each other, ‘Allah has 
honored us by being the Companions of His Prophet # and in 
supporting him until Islam became victorious and its following 
increased. We had before ignored the needs of our families, 
estates and children. Warfare has ceased, so let us go back to 
our families and children and attend to them.’ So this Ayah 
was revealed about us: 


CHAS by Kal ab Gt ys g Gink> 


¢And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw yourselves 
into destruction .> 


the destruction refers to staying with our families and estates 
and abandoning Jihdd’.” This was recorded by Abu Dawud, At- 
Tirmidhi, An-Nasai, ‘Abd bin Humayd in his Tafsir, Ibn Abu 
Hatim, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Marduwyah, Al-Hafiz Abu Yaila in his 
Musnad, Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim."! At-Tirmidhi said; 
“Hasan, Sahih, Gharib") Al-Hakim said, "It meets the criteria 
of the Two Shaykhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) but they did not 
record it." 

Abu Dawud’s version mentions that Aslam Abu Imran said, 
“We were at (the siege of} Constantinople. Then, ‘Uqbah bin 
‘Amr was leading the Egyptian forces, while the Syrian forces 
were led by Fadalah bin ‘Ubayd. Later on, a huge column of 
Roman (Byzantine) soldiers departed the city, and we stood in 
lines against them. A Muslim man raided the Roman lines 
until he broke through them and came back to us. The people 
shouted, ‘All praise is due to Allah! He is sending himself to 
certain demise.’ Abu Ayyub said, ‘O people! You explain this 
Ayah the wrong way. It was revealed about us, the Ansar 
when Allah gave victory to His religion and its following 
increased. We said to each other, It would be better for us 
now if we return to our estates and attend to them.’ Then 


0) Tyuhfat AlAhwadhi 8:311, An-Nasai in Al-Kubré 6:299, Ibn Abi 
Hatim 1:424, At-Tabari 3:590, Ibn Hibban 7:105, and Al-Hakim 
2:775. 


21 That is, almost the level of Sahih. 


538 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah revealed this Ayah (2:195)’.""4] 

Abu Bakr bin ‘Aiyash reported that Abu Ishaq As-Subai‘y 
related that a man said to Al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib, “If I raided the 
enemy lines alone and they kill me, would I be throwing 
myself to certain demise?” He said, “No. Allah said to His 
Messenger 3: 

45CE Sy BBS Ya Lo 3 Sip 
<Then fight (O Muhammad 2) in the cause of Allah, you are 
not tasked (held responsible) except for yourself.> (4:84) 


That Ayah (2:195) is about (refraining from) spending.” Ibn 
Marduwyah reported this Hadith, as well as Al-Hakim in his 
Mustadrak who said; “It meets the criteria of the Two 
Shaykhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) but they did not record it." 
Ath-Thawri and Qays bin Ar-Rabi‘ related it from Al-Bara’. but 
added: 


455 Fy GK > 
€You are not tasked (held responsible) except for yourself.> 
(4:84) 
“Destruction refers to the man who sins and refrains from 
repenting, thus throwing himself to destruction.” 
Ibn ‘Abbas said: 


¢And spend in the cause of Allah and do not throw yourselves 
into destruction> 


“This is not about fighting. But about refraining from spending 
for the sake of Allah, in which case, one will be throwing his 
self into destruction." 

The Ayah (2:195) includes the order to spend in Allah’s 
cause, in the various areas and ways that involve obedience 
and drawing closer to Allah. It especially applies to spending 
in fighting the enemies and on what strengthens the Muslims 
against the enemy. Allah states that those who refrain from 
spending in this regard will face utter and certain demise and 
destruction, meaning those who acquire this habit. Allah 


11] Abu Dawud 3:27. 


Stirah 2, Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2 539 


commands that one should acquire Ihsan (excellence in the 
religion), as it is the highest part of the acts of obedience. 
Allah said: 


di 2i' 24 diy BLh> 


¢and do good. Truly, Allah loves Al-Muhsinin (those who do 
good) .> 


on oe es gto Sin ees 
Ad 16 oh Aso Ne a ba. ji 


rtee rs 


ay Gl g ff St tes ig J dl AOS 3 ow 


SEG at ah Sl aii Got hie so ee 
4 ail Aut di 


€196. And complete Hajj and ‘Umrah for Allah. But if you are 
prevented, then sacrifice a Hady that you can afford, and do 
not shave your heads until the Hady reaches the place of 
sacrifice. And whosoever of you is ill or has an ailment on his 
scalp (necessitating shaving), he must pay a Fidyah (ransom) of 
either fasting or giving Sadaqah or a sacrifice. Then if you are 
in safety and whosoever performs the ‘Umrah (in the months of 
Hajj), before (performing) the Hajj, he must slaughter a Hady 
such as he can afford, but if he cannot (afford it), he should fast 
for three days during Hajj and seven days after his return, 
making ten days in all. This is for him whose family is not 
present at Al-Masjid Al-Haram (i.e., non-resident of Makkah). 

And fear Allah much and know that Allah is severe in 
punishment .> 


The Command to complete Hajj and ‘Umrah 


After Allah mentioned the rulings for fasting and Jihdd, he 
explained the rituals by commanding the Muslims to complete 
Haj and ‘Umrah, meaning, to finish the rituals of Hajj and 
‘Umrah after one starts them. This is why Allah said 


afterwards: 
€ereek Sb> 


<But if you are prevented 


540 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


meaning, if your way to the House is obstructed, and you are 
prevented from finishing it. This is why the scholars agree that 
starting the acts of Hajj and ‘Umrah requires one to finish 
them. As for Makhul, he said, “Complete, means to start them 
from the Migdt (areas the Prophet 3% designated to assume 
Thradm from).”) ‘Abdur-Razzéq said that Az-Zuhri said: “We 
were told that Umar commented on: 


€And complete Hajj and ‘Umrah for Allah.> 
“Complete Haj and ‘Umrah means performing each of them 


separately, and to perform ‘Umrah outside of the months of 
Hay, for Allah the Exalted says: 


C255 2h dap 


<The Haj} (pilgrimage) is (in) the well-known (lunar year) 
months .»”!7I 


As-Suddi said, 
<And complete Hajj and ‘Umrah for Allah.» 
means, “Maintain the performance of Hajj and ‘Umrah.”*! Ibn 
‘Abbas was reported to have said, “Hajj is ‘Arafat, while ‘Umrah 


is Tawaf.”*) Al-A‘mash related that Ibrahim said that 
‘Algamah commented on Allah’s statement: 


€And complete Hajj and ‘Umrah for Allah.> 


“Abdullah (Ibn Mas‘ad) recited it this way: ‘Complete Hajj and 
‘Umrah to the House, so that one does not exceed the area of 
the House during the ‘Umrah’.” Ibrahim then said, “I 
mentioned this statement to Said bin Jubayr and he said; Ibn 
‘Abbas also said that.’"5! Sufyan reported that Ibrahim said 


0 Ibn Abi Haétim 1 :437. 
2) hid. 

(3) At-Tabari 4:12. 

4] fbn Abi Hatim 1:439. 
IS! At-Tabari 4:7. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 541 


that ‘Alqamah said (regarding the Ayah 2:196), “Perform the 
Hajj and ‘Umrah to the House.”'! Ath-Thawri reported that 
Ibrahim read (the Ayah), “Perform the Hajj and ‘Umrah to the 
House.” 


If One is prevented while in Route, He slaughters the 
Sacrifice, shaves his Head and ends Ihram 


Allah’s statement: 
tll & FENG Bot Spd 


€But if you are prevented, sacrifice a Hady (animals for 
sacriface) such as you can afford ,> 


was revealed in the sixth year of Hijrah, the year of the treaty 
of Al-Hudaybiyyah when the polytheists prevented Allah’s 
Messenger #2 from reaching the House. Allah revealed Strat 
Al-Fath {chapter 48 in the Qur’an) then, and allowed the 
Muslims to slaughter any Hady (animals for sacrifice) they had. 
They had seventy camels with them for that purpose. They were 
also permitted to shave their heads and end their Ihram. When 
the Prophet # commanded them to shave their heads and end 
the state of Ihram, they did not obey him, as they were awaiting 
that order to be abrogated. When they saw that the Prophet #% 
went out after shaving his head, they imitated him. Some of 
them did not shave, but only shortened their hair. This is why 
the Prophet 3% said: 
tial “il 3? 
tMay Allah award His mercy to those who shaved.» 

They said, “What about those who shortened the hair?” He 
said in the third time, “And to those who shortened.”*) Every 
seven among them shared one camel for their sacrifice. They 
were one thousand and four hundred Companions and were 
camping in the area of Al-Hudaybiyyah, outside the Sacred 
Area. It was also reported that they were within the 
boundaries of the Sacred Area. Allah knows best. 

Being prevented from the House (Has/ includes more than 
just being sick, fearing an enemy or getting lost on the way to 


(1) Ibid. 
(21 Muslim 2 :946. 


542 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Makkah. Imam Ahmad reported that Al-Hajjaj bin ‘Amr Al- 
Ansari said that he heard Allah’s Messenger 3 saying: 
essAl Bs oles fo 18 62 hs ye 

‘Whoever suffered a broken bone or a limb, will have ended his 

Thram and has to perform Hajj again.» 
He said, “I mentioned that to Ibn ‘Abbas and Abu Hurayrah 
and they both said, ‘He (Al-Hajjaj) has said the truth’.”"! This 
Hadith is also reported in the Four Collections.) In the 
version of Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah, the Prophet 3 said, 
“Whoever limped, had a broken bone or became ill...”5! Ibn 
Abu Hatim also recorded it and said, “It was reported that Ibn 
Mas‘ad, Ibn Az-Zubayr, ‘Alaamah, Said bin Musayyib, ‘Urwah 
bin Az-Zubayr, Mujahid, An-Nakhai, ‘Ata’ and Mudqatil bin 
Hayyan said that being prevented (Has entails an enemy, an 
illness or a fracture.”*! Ath-Thawri also said, “Being prevented 
entails everything that harms the person.”°! 

It is reported in the Two Sahihs that ‘A’ishah said that 
Allah’s Messenger 3% went to Duba‘ah bint Az-Zubayr bin 
‘Abdul-Muttalib who said, “O Messenger of Allah! I intend to 
perform Hajj but I am ill.” He said, “Perform Hajj and make the 
condition: ‘My place is where You prevent (or halt) me.” 
Muslim recorded similarly from Ibn ‘Abbas.'7] So saying such a 
condition for Hajj is allowed is based on this Hadith. 

Allah’s statement: eves ~ 

45: AES GD 
¢...sacrifice a Hady such as you can afford> 


includes a sheep also, as Imam Malik reported that ‘Ali bin 
Abu Talib used to say.!*!_ Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The Hady includes 
eight types of animals: camels, cows, goats and sheep.”! 


1 Ahmad 3:450. 

21 TyRfat A-Ahwadhi 4:8, and An-Nasa’i 5:198. 
31 Abu Dawud 2:434, and Ibn Majah 2:1028. 
41 Ibn Abi Hatim 1:444-445. 

{5} hid. 

16] Fath ALBari 9:34. 

(71 Muslim 2:868. 

{8) ALMuwatta’ 1:385. 

I! Ibn Abi Hatim 1:450. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 543 


‘Abdur-Razzaq reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said about what Allah 
said: ~ y 

€isill Ss EI OD 
€...sacrifice a Hady such as you can afford» 


“As muth as one could afford.”!! Al-‘Awfi said that Ibn 
‘Abbas said, “If one can afford it, then camels, otherwise cows, 
or sheep.”7! Hisham bin Urwah quoted his father: 

2 Cail & Et Op 
€...sacrifice a Hady (animal, i.e., a sheep, a cow, or a camel) 
such as you can afford> 
‘Depending on the price.”*! 

The proof that sacrificing only a sheep is allowed in the case 
of being prevented from continuing the rites, is that Allah has 
required sacrificing whatever is available as a Hady, and the 
Hady is any type of cattle; be it camels, cows or sheep. This is 
the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas the cousin of Allah’s Messenger 2% 
and the scholar of Tafsir. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that 
‘A'ishah, the Mother of the believers, said, “The Prophet 2% once 
offered some sheep as Hady.”!*! 

Allah’s statement: 


Che Gill te EK 1 > 


<...and do not shave your heads until the Hady reaches the 
place of sacrifice .> 


is a continuation of His statement: 
5 oalb eal sb 
¢And complete, the Hajj and ‘Umrah for Allah.> 
and is not dependent upon: 
idl 5 EG Broil fy 
<But if you are prevented, then sacrifice a Hady> 


() Ibn Abi Hatim 1:451, 

7] At-Tabari 4:30. 

3] thn Abi Hatim 1:452 

(41 Fath ALBari 3-639 and Muslim 2:958. 


544 ___Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


as Ibn Jarir has erroneously claimed. When the Prophet_# 
and his Companions were prevented from entering the Sacred 
House during the Al-Hudaybiyyah yéar by the polytheists from 
Quraysh, they shaved their heads and sacrificed their Hady 
outside the Haram (Sacred) area. In normal circumstances, and 
when one can safely reach the House, he is not allowed to 
shave his head until: 


eee Bolt Be fe 
thé Sill fe E> 


€...and do not shave your heads until the. Hady reaches the 
place of sacrifice .> 


and then he ends the rituals of Hajj or ‘Umrah, or both if he 
had assumed Ihrdm for both. It is recorded in the Two Sahihs 
that Hafsah said, “O Allah’s Messenger! What is wrong with 
the people, they have finished their Inram for Umrah but you 
have not?” The Prophet 3% said, 


ost & Elvi us S385 bi Jp 


«I matted my hair and I have garlanded my Hady (animals for 
sacrifice), so I will not finish my Ihram till I offer the 
sacrifice!" 


Whoever shaved his Head during Ihram, will have to pay 
the Fidyah 


Allah said: 
438 Ni TN ee of Bak et i By Sad KE > 


<And whosoever of you is ill or has an ailment on his scalp 
(necessitating shaving), he must pay a Fidyah.> 


Al-Bukhari reported that ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Asbahani said 
that he heard ‘Abdullah bin Ma‘qil saying that he sat with 
Kab bin Ujrah in the mosque of Kufah (in Iraq). He then 
asked him about the Fidyah of the fasting. Ka‘b said, “This 
was revealed concerning my case especially, but it is also for 
you in general. I was carried to Allah’s Messenger # and the 
lice were falling in great numbers on my face. The Prophet 
said: 


01 Fath Al-Bari 3:493 and Muslim 2:902. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2 545 
V 2G edt Saf ul A Gy ah aged Of o3f 8 ue 


‘Il never thought that your ailment (or struggle) had reached to 
such an extent as I see. Can you aera a sheep (for sacrifice)?’ I 
replied in the negative.» 


He then said: 
pli fy gle iki pS JS) Sle EB abl 5 Nea 


wialy S115 


«Fast for three days or feed six poor persons, each with half a 
Sa’ of food (1 Sa’ = 3 kilograms approx.) and shave your head.» 


So this is a general judgement derived from a specific case." 

Imam Ahmad recorded that Ka‘b bin ‘Ujrah said, “Allah’s 
Messenger #% came by while | was igniting the fire under a pot 
and while the lice were falling down my head or my eyelids. He 
said: 

pat EE setteds ys Susy 
«Do these lice in your head bother you?» 

I said, ‘Yes.’ He said: 


CK UH hg sics Ey aabl sf oth Sl 025 as 


«Shave it, then fast three days, or feed six poor people, or 
sacrifice an animal.» 


Ayyub (one of the narrators of the Hadith) commented, “I do 
not know which alternative was stated first.”! The wording of 
the Qur’én begins with the easiest then the more difficult 
options: “Pay a Fidyah of fasting (three days), feeding (six poor 
persons) or sacrificing (an animal).” Meanwhile, the Prophet # 
advised Ka‘b with the more rewarding option first, that is, 
sacrificing a sheep, then feeding six poor persons, then fasting 
three days. Each Text is suitable in its place and context, all 
the thanks and praises are due to Allah. 


Tamattu‘ during Hajj 
Allah said: 

0) Fath ALBGri 8:34. 

I Ahmad 4:241. 


546 Tafsir _Ibn_Kathir 
sil Se ETO Al Sy yay ES EN tgp 


<Then if you are in safety and whosoever performs the ‘Umrah 
(in the months of Hajj), before (performing) the Hajj, he must 
slaughter a Hady such as he can afford ,> 


That is, when you are able to complete the rites, so whoever 
among you connects his ‘Umrah with Hajj having the same 
Thram for both, or, first assuming Ihradm for ‘Umrah, and then 
assuming Ihram for Hajj when finished the ‘Umrah, this is the 
more specific type of Tamattu‘ which is well-known among the 
discussion of the scholars whereas in general there are two 
types of Tamattu‘, as the authentic Hadiths prove, since 
among the narrators are those who said, "Allah’s Messenger 2 
performed Tamattu‘, and others who said, “Qarin" but there is 
no difference between them over the Hady. 

So Allah said, 


Ceili i ESO gt § ath a A OD 


<Then if you are in safety and whosoever performs the ‘Umrah 
(in the months of Hajj), before (performing) the Hajj (i.e., Hajj 
At-Tamattu’ and Al-Qiran), he must slaughter a Hady such as 
he can afford ,> 


means let him sacrifice whatever Hady is available to him, the 
least of which is a sheep. One is also allowed to sacrifice a 
cow because the Prophet # slaughtered cows on behalf of his 
wives. Al-Awzail reported that Abu Hurayrah narrated that 
Allah’s Messenger 3 slaughtered cows on behalf of his wives 
when they were performing Tamattu‘!"|| This was reported by 
Abu Bakr bin Marduwyah. 

This last Hadith proves that Tamattu‘ is legislated. It is 
reported in the Two Sahihs that ‘Imran bin Husayn said, “We 
performed Hajj At-Tamattu‘ in the lifetime of Allah’s Messenger 
#% and then the Qur’4én was revealed (regarding Hajj At- 
Tamattu}. Nothing was revealed to forbid it, nor did he (the 
Prophet 3%) forbid it until he died. And somebody said what he 
wished (regarding Hajj At-Tamattu) according to his own 
opinion.”?! Al-Bukhari said that Imran was talking about 


01 Abu Dawud 2:362. 
(21 Fath Al-Bari 8: 34 and Muslim 2:900. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 547 


‘Umar. 

It is reported in an authentic narration that Umar used to 
discourage the people from performing Tamattu’. He used to 
say, “If we refer to Allah’s Book, we should complete it,” 
meaning: 


Kisidl Se CET G gt sci SS Bp 


¢...whosoever performs the ‘Umrah (in the months of Hajj), 
before (performing) the Hajj, he must slaughter a Hady such as 
he can afford,> 


However ‘Umar did not say that Tamattu‘ is unlawful. He 
only prevented them so that the people would increase their 
trips to the House for Haj (during the months of Haj) and 
‘Umrah (throughout the year), as he himself has stated. 


Whoever performs Tamattu‘ should fast Ten Days if He 
does not have a Hady 


Allah said: 


...but if he cannot (afford it), he should fast three days during 
the Hajj and seven days after his return (to his home), making 
ten days in all.> 


This Ayah means: “Those who do not find a Hady, \|et them 
fast three days during the Hajj season.” Al-‘Awfi said that Ibn 
‘Abbas said, “If one does not have a Hady, he should fast 
three days during Hajj, before ‘Arafah day. If the day of 
‘Arafah was the third day, then his fast is complete. He should 
also fast seven days when he gets back home.”"! Abu Ishaq 
reported from Wabarah from Ibn Umar who said, “One fasts 
one day before the day of Tarwiyah, the day of Tarwiyah 
(eighth day of Dhul-Hijjah) and then ‘Arafah day (the ninth 
day of the month of Dhul-Hijjah).”?! The same state:nent was 
reported by Ja‘far bin Muhammad from his father from ‘Ali.'! 

If one did not fast these three days or at least some of them 
before ‘Id day (the tenth day of Dhul-Hijjah), he is allowed to 


11] At-Tabari 4:97. 
(2! At-Tabari 4:95. 
(3) At-Tabari 4:94. 


548 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


fast during the Tashriq days (11-12-13th day of Dhul-Hijjah). 
‘A’ishah and Ibn ‘Umar said, “Fasting the days of Tashriq was 
only allowed for those who did not find the Hady,” as Al- 
Bukhari has reported. Sufydn related that Ja‘far bin 
Muhammad narrated that his father said that ‘Ali said, 
“Whoever did not fast the three days during the Hajj, should 
fast them during the days of Tashrig.” This is also the position 
taken by Ubayd bin ‘Umayr Al-Laythi, Ikrimah, Al-Hasan Al- 
Basri and ‘Urwah bin Az-Zubayr,''! referring to the general 
meaning of Allah’s statement: 


git 4 ih se tsp 


«...fast three days during the Hajj...> 


As for what Muslim reported that Qutaybah Al-Hudhali said 
that Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


ES FE ahh $35 5-25 ST eT AN Gh 
‘The days of Tashriq are days of eating and drinking and 
remembering Allah the Exalted .»'?1 


This narration is general in meaning while what ‘A’ishah and 
Ibn Umar narrated is specific. 
Allah said: 
ett 15 ns; 
«...and seven days after his return .> 


There are two opinions regarding the meaning of this Ayah. 
First, it means ‘when you return to the camping areas’. The 
second, upon going back home. ‘Abdur-Razz&q reported that 
Salim narrated that he heard Ibn ‘Umar saying: 


pest Ni sy ol og Af Bi ps 4g Zi o> 
“4...but if he cannot (afford it), he should fast three days 
during the Hajj and seven days after his return ,> 


means when he goes back to his family.”5) The same opinion 
was reported from Said bin Jubayr, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Mujahid, 
‘Ata’, Tkrimah, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Imam Az-Zuhri and Ar- 
1 At-Tabari 4 :98-99. 

21 Muslim 2:800. 

3! Tafsir ‘Abdur-Razzaq 1:76. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 549 


Rabi‘ bin Anas.!"! 

Al-Bukhari reported that Salim bin ‘Abdullah narrated that 
Ibn ‘Umar said, “During the Farewell Hajj of Allah’s Messenger 
#3, he performed Tamattu‘ with ‘Umrah and Hajj. He drove a 
Hady along with him from Dhul-Hulayfah. Allah’s Messenger 3 
started by assuming Ihrdm for ‘Umrah, and then for Hajj. And 
the people, too, performed the ‘Umrah and Hajj along with the 
Prophet #8. Some of them brought the Hady and drove it along 
with them, while the others did not. So, when the Prophet # 
arrived at Makkah, he said to the people: 


Tore Fee wf- Ge 88 oye 40) 4 of 8% cof be tie 
eo os Ee ph So Le OF ett Ue od VSP Gaal Se OW Yin 


dS Ss jiads 328 ayy bat, ooh Cad Gaal x 35 
ON) 5 My Bey cael 3 pl Soe pa chs i i gs gs 
tall 


‘Whoever among you has driven the Hady, should not finish 
his Ihram till he completes his Hajj. And whoever among you 
has not (driven) the Hady with him, he should perform Tawaf 
of the Ka‘bah and between As-Safa and Al-Marwah. Then, he 
should shave or cut his hair short and finish his Ihram, and 
should later assume Ihraém for Hajj; [but he must offer a Hady 
(sacrifice)]. And if anyone cannot afford a Hady, he should fast 
for three days during the Hajj and seven days when he returns 
home.» 


He then mentioned the rest of the Hadith, which is reported 
in the Two Sahihs,'2! 
Allah said: 
dies ts ap 
¢...making ten days in all.> 


to emphasize the ruling we mentioned above. This method is 
common in the Arabic language, for they would say, I have 
seen with my eyes, heard with my ears and written with my 
hand,’ to emphasize such facts. Similarly, Allah said: 


455% Ake gb Y5> 
(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 2:498. 
(1 Fath Al-Bari 3:630 and Muslim 2:901 


550 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
¢...nor a bird that flies with its two wings» (6:38) and: 
42, 1h ip 
€...nor did you write any book (whatsoever) with your right 

hand> (29:48) and: 


7 cers or ee 


85 nih 5 8, 2 85 | Gast Go elf anys 0255> 


<And We appointed for Miisa thirty nights and added (to the period) 
ten (more), and he completed the term, appointed by his Lord, of forty 
nights.> (7:142) 

It was also said that the meaning of “ten days in all” 
emphasizes the order to fast for ten days, not less than that. 


The Residents of Makkah do not perform Tamattu‘ 

Allah said: 

Cdl al gus AK J GD 
<This is for him whose family is not present at Al-Masjid Al- 
Haram (i.e., non-resident of Makkah) .> 
This Ayah concerns the residents of the area of the Haram, for 
they do not perform Tamattu’. ‘Abdur-Razz&q reported that 
Tawus said, “Tamattu‘ is for the people, those whose families 
are not residing in the Haram area (Makkah), not for the 
residents of Makkah. Hence Allah’s Statement: 
Cdl apa gui AN fe J a 

<This is for him whose family is not present at Al-Masjid Al-Haram 
(i.e., non-resident of Makkah) .> 

‘Abdur-Razzéq then said, “I was also told that Ibn ‘Abbas 
said similar to Tawas.”"! Allah said: 

4<ii (556> 

<...and fear Allah> meaning, in what He has commanded you 

and what He prohibited for you. He then said: 
4 ill 48 GS kD 
<...and know that Allah is severe in punishment> 


(CW At-Tabari 4:111. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 551 


ENGL Yr) eae for those who defy 


vata Waals cee ow Pdecese {isi * | His command and 
i ieee j : 
a WAL Serio od al eo commit what He has 


fhe ants eld SYS 3 L455 prohibited. 
cpiasdess A Siilitis | Saks He BD 

fog 5 OA sts | GS SY Si oe F 
eae 53 © ree) 2 Sg cle 


BSNS pee 4% Stal 3 Fate se gl 3 Alrere ¥ 3,4 


Te Bee or ° eAr 8s 


\7 oe Loe Hl ae po ia is 
ean iL 5G 55% ‘ we oie 
\or CSives ny) ifs et Ayer ne LN 1935535 
amis ania 9 ==> 5 


a is CIM dale osdt 
ee on inital s 3S 4 8. ene SA 3 ae, 
ey - AP ae 4197. The Hajj 

) ReiAbtie Is ae (pilgrimage) is (in) the 


ll on 2G 22 SE Z re cals = well-known months. So 


. whosoever intends to 
FAN OSes SIAN | eacics perform Hajj therein (by 
Teen tt CNees5 4 l|assuming Ihram), then 
Palle IGM EG 53 KG he should not have sex- 
Arn hit x09 G3 GG | ual relations (with his 
wife), nor commit sin, 
nor dispute unjustly 
during the Hajj. And 
whatever good you do, 
Allah knows it. And take provisions for the journey, but the best 
provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness). So fear Me, O men of 
understanding!> 


pee 


When does Ihrdm for Hajj start 
Allah said: 
€Eshs Tal gi 
<The Hajj is (in) the well-known months .> 


This Ayah indicates that Ihram for Hajj only occurs during 
the months of Hajj. This was reported from Ibn ‘Abbas,!#) 
Jabir, ‘Ata’, Tawis and Mujahid. The proof for this is Allah’s 


Ol at-Tabari 4:115. 


552 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Statement that Hajj occurs during known, specific months, 
which indicates that Hajj is not allowed before that, just as the 
prayer has a fixed time (before which one’s prayer is not 
accepted). 

Ash-Shafii recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “No person should 
assume Jhrdm for Hajj before the months of the Hajj, for Allah 
said: 


é2 chest pase 


Sue Teal Slip 
<The Hajj is (in) the well-known months.>""! 


Ibn Khuzaymah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “No Ihram for 
Hajj should be assumed, except during the months of Hajj,!?! 
for among the Sunnah of Hajj is that one assume Ihram for it 
during the Hajj months.” This is an authentic narration and 
the Companion’s statement that such and such is among the 
Sunnah is considered as a Hadith of the Prophet 2, according 
to the majority of the scholars. This is especially the case when 
it is Ibn ‘Abbas who issued this statement, as he is the 
Tarjum4n (translator, interpreter, explainer) of the Qur'an. 

There is a Hadith about this subject too. Ibn Marduwyah 
related that Jabir narrated that the Prophet # said: 


ces Ig NEUE Ga 
«No one should assume Ihram for Hajj, but during the months 
of Hajj.s" 

The chain of narrators for this Hadith is reasonable. Ash- 
Shafii and Al-Bayhaqi recorded this Hadith from Ibn Jurayj 
who related that Abu Az-Zubayr said that he heard Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah being asked, “Does one assume Ihram for Hajj before 
the months of the Hajj?” He said, “No."4] This narration is 
more reliable than the narration that we mentioned from the 
Prophet #%. In short, this statement is the opinion of the 


Companion, supported by Ibn ‘Abbas’ statement that it is a 
part of the Sunnah not to assume Ihram for Hajj before the 


1 ALUmm 2:132. 

[2] thn Khuzaymah 4 :162. 

3) Al-Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah, and Tafsir ‘Abdur-Razzaq. 
4] ALUmm 2:132, and Al-Bayhaqi 4 :343. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2 553 
months of the Hajj. Allah knows best. 


The Months of Hajj 
Allah said: 
2588 74° 3 Ie Balp 


¢...the well-known months .> 


Al-Bukhari said that Ibn ‘Umar said that these are Shawwal, 
Dhul-Qa‘dah and the first ten days of Dhul-Hijjah.") This 
narration for which Al-Bukhari did not mention the chain of 
narrators, was collected by a continuous chain of narrators 
that Ibn Jarir rendered authentic, leading to Ibn ‘Umar, who 
said: 

ESE 2S zip 


<The Hajj (pilgrimage) is (in) the well-known (lunar year) 
months .> 

“which are Shawwdal, Dhul-Qa‘dah and the (first) ten days of 
Dhul-Hijjah.”7! Its chain is Sahih. Al-Hakim also recorded it 
in his Mustadrak, and he said,"It meets the criteria of the Two 
Shaykhs."!5! 

This statement is also reported from Umar, ‘Ali, Ibn Mas‘td, 
‘Abdullah bin Az-Zubayr, Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Ata’, Tawts, Mujahid, 
Ibrahim An-Nakhai, Imam Ash-Sha‘bi, Al-Hasan, Ibn Sirin, 
Makhul, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak bin Muzahim, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas 
and Mudatil bin Hayyan."! This opinion was preferred by Ibn 
Jarir who said, “It is a common practice to call two months 
and a part of the third month as ‘months’. This is similar to 
the Arab’s saying, I visited such and such person this year or 
this day.’ He only visited him during a part of the year and a 
part of the day. Allah said: 


€ace Sy 35 WS OS ‘ina yaad 


But whosoever hastens to leave in two sites there is no sin on 
him.> 


0) Fath ALBari 3:490. 

21 At-Tabari 4:116. 

13] al-Hakim 2:276. 

4] fbn Abi Hatim 2 :486-488. 


554 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


In this case, one will only be hastening for one and a half 
days.” 
Allah then said: 


toll Sus Bod 
€So whosoever intends (Farada) to perform Hajj therein (by 
assuming Ihram),> 


meaning that one’s assuming the Ihrdm requires a Hajj, for 
the person is required to complete the rituals of Hajj after 
assuming Ihrdm. Ibn Jarir said that Al-‘Awfi said, “The 
scholars agree that (Farada) ‘intends’ mentioned in the Ayah 
means it is a requirement and an obligation.) ‘Ali bin Abu 
Talhah said that Ibn ‘Abbas said: 


Celi Sas 5 SSP 
€So whosoever intends to perform Hajj therein (by assuming 
Thram),> 
refers to those who assume Jhrdm for Hajj and ‘Umrah”. ‘Ata’ 
said, “’Intends’, means, assumes the Thram.” Similar 
statements were attributed to Ibrahim, Ad-Dahhak and 
others, |?! 


Prohibition of Rafath (Sexual Intercourse) during Hajj 
Allah said: 
55 Sap 
¢He should not have Rafath> 


This Ayah means that those who assume the Thradm for Hajj 
or ‘Umrah are required to avoid the Rafath, meaning, sexual 
intercourse. Allah’s statement here is similar to His statement: 


GIG 5 SN oat SS seed LN 
€lt is made lawful for you to have Rafath (sexual relations) with 
your wives on the night of the fast.> (2:187) 
Whatever might lead to sexual intercourse, such as 
embracing, kissing and talking to women about similar 


Ol at-Tabari 4:120-121. 
(21 atTabari 4:123. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 555 


subjects, is not allowed. Ibn Jarir reported that Nafi‘ narrated 
that ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar said, “Rafath means sexual 
intercourse or mentioning this subject with the tongue, by 
either men or women.”! ‘Ata’ bin Abu Rabah said that Rafath 
means sexual intercourse and foul speech.) This is also the 
opinion of ‘Amr bin Dinar. ‘Ata’ also said that they used to 
even prevent talking (or hinting) about this subject.'*! Tawas 
said that Rafath includes one’s saying, “When I end the Jhram 
I will have sex with you.”*! This is also the same explanation 
offered by Abu Al-‘Aliyah regarding Rafath. ‘Ali bin Abu Talhah 
said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Rafath means having sex with the 
wife, kissing, fondling and saying foul words to her, and 
similar acts.” 5) Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn ‘Umar said that Rafath 
means to have sex with women.'®! This is also the opinion of 
Said bin Jubayr, Tkrimah, Mujahid, Ibrahim An-Nakhai, Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah who narrated it from ‘Ata’ and Makhul, ‘Ata Al- 
Khurasani, ‘Ata’ bin Yasar, ‘Atiyah, Ibrahim, Ar-Rabi‘, Az- 
Zuhri, As-Suddi, Malik bin Anas, Muqatil bin Hayyan, ‘Abdul- 
Karim bin Malik, Al-Hasan, Qataédah and Ad-Dahhak, and 
others. 


The Prohibition of Fustiq during Hajj 

Allah said: 

ayes Tip 

¢...nor commit sin> Miqsam and several other scholars related 
that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “It is disobedience." This is also the 
opinion of ‘Ata,’ Mujahid, Tawis, Ikrimah, Said bin Jubayr, 
Muhammad bin Ka‘, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ibrahim An-Nakhai, 
Az-Zuhri, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, ‘Ata’ bin Yasar, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani 
and Muaatil bin Hayyan.!7! 

Ibn Wahb reported that Nafi‘ narrated that ‘Abdullah bin 


( At-Tabari 4:126. 

1 At-Tabari 4:127. 

3] At-Tabari 4:128. 

I4l tid. 

(5) At-Tabari 4:129. 

(6) hid. 

(71 thn Abi Hatim 2:497-500. 


556 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


‘Umar said, “Fusdq [or sin mentioned in the Ayah (2:197)] 
refers to committing what Allah has forbidden in the Sacred 
Area.”4!1 

Several others said that Fusdég means cursing others, they 
based this on the authentic Hadith: 


08 385 3,5 kth Sts 
«Cursing the Muslim is Fusiq, while fighting him is Kufr.s!?! 


‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said Fusiiq here means 
slaughtering animals for the idols, as Allah said: 


ty 6 3 Lita 


<...0r impious (Fisq) meat (of an animal) which is slaughtered 
as a sacrifice for others than Allah .> (6:145) 

Ad-Dahhak said that Fustq is insulting one another with 
bad nicknames. 

Those who said that the Fustiq means all types of 
disobedience are correct. Allah has also prohibited committing 
injustice during the months of Hajj in specific, although 
injustice is prohibited throughout the year. This is why Allah 
said: 


os we 


ead b5 WU i Rai bal as A Sal Gp 
<...of them four are sacred. That is the right religion, so wrong 
not yourselves therein.» (9:36) 
Allah said about the Sacred Area: 
dsl Ge be BE AU SIL 45 5 sp 
¢...and whoever inclines to evil actions therein or to do wrong, 
him We shall cause to taste from a painful torment.» (22:25) 
It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah narrated 
that Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 
0Sl aly 655 ab be G58 Gtk py Sy ab eth sls Be gy 
«Whoever performed Hajj to this (Sacred) House and did not 
commit Rafath or Fusiq, will return sinless, just as the day his 


|) Ibn Abi Hatim 2:497. 
[2] Fath ALBari 1:135. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 557 


mother gave birth to him.»!*! 


The Prohibition of arguing during Hajj 
Allah said: 
eal 3 Sa, 5p 
nor should there be Jidal during Hajj> 

meaning, disputes and arguments. Ibn Jarir related that 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘dd said that what Allah said: 

deril g I, Hd 

¢...nor dispute unjustly during the Hajj .> 

means to argue with your companion (or fellow) until you 
make him angry. This is similar to the the opinion that 
Miqsam and Ad-Dahhak related to Ibn ‘Abbas.2! This is also 
the same meaning reported from Abu Al-‘Aliyah, ‘Ata’, 
Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, Ikrimah, Jabir bin Zayd, ‘Ata’ Al- 
Khurasani, Makhdal, As-Suddi, Mugatil bin Hayyan, ‘Amr bin 
Dinar, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Ibrahim An-Nakhai, 
‘Ata bin Yasar, Al-Hasan, Qatadah and Az-Zuhri,'*! 


The Encouragement for Righteous Deeds and to bring 
Provisions for Hajj 
Allah said: 
Cl Ws A> RE U5 
¢And whatever good you do, Allah knows it.> 


After Allah prohibited evil in deed and tongue, He 
encouraged righteous, good deeds, stating that He is 
knowledgeable of the good that they do, and He will reward 
them with the best awards on the Day of Resurrection. 

Allah said next: 


GA HK sg 55S 
¢And take provisions (with you) for the journey, but the best 


(1) Fath Al-Bari 4:25 and Muslim 2:983. 
2) At-Tabari 4:141. 
(31 ton Abi Hatim 2:503-505: 


558 — Tafsir lbn_Kathir 


provision is At-Taquwa (piety, righteousness) .} 

Al-Bukhari and Abu Dawud reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, 
“The people of Yemen used to go to Hajj without taking 
enough supplies with them. They used to say, ‘We are those 
who have Tawakkul (reliance on Allah).’ Allah revealed this 
Ayah: 

Gi NB OS SSD 
¢And take provisions (with you) for the journey, but the best 
provision is At-Taquwa (piety, righteousness) >") 

Ibn Jarir and Ibn Marduwyah narrated that Ibn ‘Umar said, 
“When people assumed Ihradm, they would throw away 
whatever provisions they had and would acquire other types of 
provisions. Allah revealed: 

esi 81 OS ASS 
¢And take a provisions (with you) for the journey, but the best 
provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness) .> 
Allah forbade them from this practice and required them to 
take flour and Sawigq (a type of food usually eaten with dates) 
with them.” 
The Provisions of the Hereafter 
Allah said: 
€Gii wht 3 OS 
¢...but the best provision is At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness) .> 
When Allah required mankind to supply themselves with what 
sustains them for the journeys of this life, He directed them to 
the necessary provisions for the Hereafter: Taqwa. Allah said 
in another Ayah: 
bee ie ete pie, yy 
Cae AS atl 35 E355 
€...and as an adornment; and the raiment of Taqwa, that is 
better.> (7:26) 


Allah mentioned the material covering and then He 


0) Fath AL-Bari 3:449, Abu Dawud 2:309. 
[21 at-Tabari 4:156. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 559 


mentioned the spiritual covering, which includes humbleness, 
obedience and Taqwd. He also stated that the latter provision 
is better and more beneficial than the former. 


45 Sale o55> 
<So fear Me, O men of understanding!> 
meaning: ‘Fear My torment, punishment, and affliction for 


those who defy Me and do not adhere to My commands, O 

people of reason and understanding.’ 
pee te ZN YS Fea 6 SUS Ths oF fics Geet Sap 
Ao of she oj pes UT tye Syail ZEW de it eoiG 
€198. There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your 
Lord (during pilgrimage by trading). Then when you leave 
‘Arafat, remember Allah (by glorifying His praises, i.e., 
prayers and invocations) at the Mash‘ar-il-Haram. And 
remember Him (by invoking Allah for all good) as He has 
guided you, and verily you were before, of those who were 
astray>. 


Commercial Transactions during Hajj 

Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Ukaz, Mijannah 
and Dhul-Majaéz were trading posts during the time of 
Jahiliyyah. During that era, they did not like the idea of 
conducting business transactions during the Hajj season. 
Later, this Ayah was revealed: 


qreass of SUG PES J fit pleas SiS 

<There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord.> 
during the Hajj season.”!! 

Abu Dawud and others recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “They 
used to avoid conducting business transactions during the 
Haj season, saying that these are the days of Dhikr. Allah 
revealed: 

Cas of SUG Mis OS Cit ples Sit 
(1) Fath ALBari 8:34. 


560 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


<There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord 
(during pilgrimage by trading).>""! 

This is also the explanation of Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, 
Tkrimah, Mansur bin Al-Mu‘tamir, Qatadah, Ibrahim An- 
Nakhai, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and others. Ibn Jarir reported that 
Abu Umaymah said that when Ibn Umar was asked about 
conducting trade during the Hajj, he recited the Ayah: 

eR aSS ot SUG (ASS AN Cit pleas Sap 
€There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord 
(during pilgrimage by trading) .>'! 

This Hadith is related to Ibn ‘Umar with a strong chain of 
narrators. This Hadith is also related to the Prophet #, as 
Ahmad reported that Abu Umamah At-Taymi said, “I asked Ibn 
‘Umar, ‘We buy (and sell during the Hajj, so do we still have a 
valid Hajj?’ He said, ‘Do you not perform Tawdf around the 
House, stand at ‘Arafat, throw the pebbles and shave your 
heads?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ Ibn Umar said, ‘A man came to the 
Prophet #% and asked him about what you asked me, and the 


Prophet # did not answer him until Jibril came down with this 
Ayah: 
Cia fh SS Us A ick pee Sap 

<There is no sin on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord 

(during pilgrimage by trading) .> 
The Prophet #{ summoned the man and said: ‘You are 
pilgrims»."51 Ibn Jarir narrated that Abu Salih said to ‘Umar, 
“O Leader of the faithful! Did you conduct trade transactions 


during the Hajj?” He said, “Was their livelihood except during 
Hajj?’ 4} 


Standing at ‘Arafat 
Allah said: 
ES AES de HW yeoiG pole 2 4ST Tsp 
(1 Abu Dawud 2:350. 
[2] At-Tabari 4:165. 


(3) Ahmad 2:155. 
(4) At-Tabari 4:168. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) 561 


<Then when you leave ‘Arafat, remember Allah (by glorifying 
His praises, i.e., prayers and invocations) at the Mash‘ar-il- 
Haram .> 


‘Arafat is the place where one stands during the Hajj and it 
is a pillar of the rituals of Hajj. Imam Ahmad and the Sunan 
compilers recorded that ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Ya‘mar Ad-Diyli 
said that he heard Allah’s Messenger # saying: 


uly 531 3 jad ally 1 5 Sys Syst yh - OE - S02 le 


‘Hajj is ‘Arafat, (thrice). Hence, those who have stood at 
‘Arafat before dawn will have performed (the rituals of the 
Hajj). The days of Mind are three, and there is no sin for those 
who move on after two days, or for those who stays!) 


The time to stand on ‘Arafat starts from noon on the day of 
‘Arafah until dawn the next day, which is the day of the 
Sacrifice (the tenth day of Dhul-Hijjah). The Prophet 2 stood 
at ‘Arafat during the Farewell Hajj, after he had offered the Zuhr 
(noon) prayer, until sunset. He said, “Learn your rituals from 
me.”?] In this Hadith (i.e., in the previous paragraph) he said, 
“Whoever stood at ‘Arafat before dawn, will have performed (the 
rituals of Hajj.” 

Urwah bin Mudarris bin Harithah bin Lam At-Taii said, “! 
came to Allah’s Messenger # at Al-Muzdalifah when it was 
time to pray. I said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! I came from the two 
mountains of Tayy’, and my animal became tired and I became 
tired. I have not left any mountain, but stood on it. Do I have a 
valid Hajj?’ Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 


Be yee 


UES 6285 Ls 95 IB Ie 
«Whoever performed this prayer with us, stood with us until 


we moved forth, and had stood at ‘Arafat before that, day or 
night, will have performed the Hajj and completed its ritualsy.” 


(1 Ahmad 4:310, Abu Dawud 2:485, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 3 :633, An- 
Nasaii 5 :256, and Ibn Majah 2:1003. 


(2) Muslim 2:943. 


562 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


This Hadith was collected by Imam Ahmad and the compilers 
of the Sunan, and At-Tirmidhi graded it Sahih.'"! It was 
reported that the mount was called ‘Arafat because, as ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq reported that ‘Ali bin Abu Talib said, “Allah sent Jibril 
to Prophet Ibrahim and he performed Hajj for him (to teach 
him its rituals). When Ibrahim reached ‘Arafat he said, I have 
‘Araftu (I know this place).’ He had come to that area before. 
Thereafter, it was called ‘Arafat.”!7] Ibn Al-Mubarak said that 
‘Ata’ said, “It was called ‘Arafat because Jibril used to teach 
Ibrahim the rituals of Hajj. Ibrahim would say, I have ‘Araftu, 
I have ‘Araftu.’ It was thereafter called ‘Arafat.” Similar 
statements were attributed to Ibn ‘Abbas! , Ibn ‘Umar and 
Abu Mijlaz.'* Allah knows best. 

‘Arafat is also called Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram, Al-Mash‘ar Al- 
Aqsa and Ilal, while the mount that is in the middle of ‘Arafat 
is called Jabal Ar-Rahmah (Mount of Mercy). 


The Time to leave ‘Arafat and Al-Muzdalifah 


Ibn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “During the 
time of Jahiliyyah, the people used to stand at ‘Arafat. When 
the sun would be on top of the mountains, just as the turban 
is on top of a man’s head, they would move on. Allah’s 
Messenger 3% delayed moving from ‘Arafat until sunset.”5! Ibn 
Marduwyah related this Hadith and added, “He then stood at 
Al-Muzdalifah and offered the Fajr (Dawn) prayer at an early 
time. When the light of dawn broke, he moved on.” This Hadith 
has a Hasan chain of narrators. The long Hadith that Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah narrated, which Muslim collected, stated, “The 
Prophet #§ kept standing there (meaning at ‘Arafat) until 
sunset, when the yellow light had somewhat gone and the disc 
of the sun had disappeared. Then, the Prophet # made 
Usamah sit behind him, and in order to keep her under 
control, pulled the nose string of Al-Qaswa’ so hard, that its 
head touched the saddle. He gestured with his right hand and 


('l Ahmad 4:261, Abu Dawud 2:486, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 3:633, An- 
Nasa’ 5:264, and Ibn Majah 2:1004. 

[2] ‘abdur-Razzaq 5:96. 

{S) at-Tabari 4:173-174. 

4] thn Abi Hatim 2:519. 

SI Ibn Abi Hatim 2:517. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2) _ 563 


said, "Proceed calmly people, calmly!" Whenever he happened to 
pass over an elevated tract of sand, he lightly loosened the nose 
string of his camel till she climbed up and this is how they 
reached Al-Muzdalifah. There, he led the Maghrib (Evening) and 
‘Isha’ (Night) prayers with one Adhdn and two Iqgamah (which 
announces the imminent start of the acts of the prayer) and did 
not glorify Allah in between them (i.e., he did not perform 
voluntary Rak‘ah). Allah’s Messenger #4 then laid down till 
dawn and offered the Fajr (Dawn) prayer with Adhdn and 
Igamah, when the morning light was clear. He again mounted 
Al-Qaswa’, and when he came to Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram, he 
faced towards Qiblah, supplicated to Allah, glorifying Him and 
saying, La ilaha illallah, and he continued standing until the 
ceyient was very clear. He then went quickly before the sun 
rose.’ 

It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Us4mah bin Zayd was 
asked, “How was the Prophet’s pace when he moved?” He said, 
“Slow, unless he found space, then he would go a little faster.”!*! 


Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram 


‘Abdur-Razzaq reported that Ibn ‘Umar said that all of Al- 
Muzdalifah is Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram.'*! It was reported that Ibn 
‘Umar was asked about Allah’s statement: 


555i ZEN see HI WeniG> 


¢...remember Allah (by glorifying His praises, i.e., prayers 
and invocations) at the Mash‘ar-il-Haram .> 


He said, “It is the Mount and the surrounding area.”“! It was 
reported that Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram is what is between the two 
Mounts (refer to the following Hadith), as Ibn ‘Abbas, Sa‘id bin 
Jubayr, Tkrimah, Mujahid, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Al- 
Hasan and Qatadah have stated.!5! 

Imam Ahmad recorded that Jubayr bin Mut‘im narrated that 
the Prophet #% said: 
(I Muslim 2 :886. 
[2] Fath Al-Bari 3:605, Muslim 2:936. 
(31 Ibn Abi Hatim 2:521. 
4] At-Tabari 4:176. 
{S] thn Abi Hatim 2 :521-522. 


564 Tafsir Ibn_Kathir 

PM Se ANG aS BS 85 G2 32 Yi aye tiie jb 
05 GAB ol 85 SA cu Is 

“All of ‘Arafat is a place of standing, and keep away from 

‘Uranah. All of Al-Muzdalifah is a place for standing, and keep 

away from the bottom of Muhassir. All of the areas of Makkah 

are a place for sacrifice, and all of the days of Tashriq are days 

of sacrifice ,»!"I 

Allah then said: 


4,25 US ivenifi> 
¢And remember Him (by invoking Allah for all good) as He has 
guided you .> 
This Ayah reminds Muslims of Allah’s bounty on them that 
He has directed and taught them the rituals of Hajj according 
to the guidance of Prophet Ibrahim Al-Khalil. This is why Allah 
said: 
Edict BS ws of eee ol 5> 
‘€...and verily, you were, before, of those who were astray .> 


It was said that this Ayah refers to the condition before the 
guidance or the Qur’aén or the Messenger #%, all of which are 
correct meanings. 

Ci he5 SAL Af Oy SIN HT Bish dey Ital Shp 
€199. Then depart from the place whence all the people depart 
and ask Allah for His forgiveness. Truly, Allah is Oft- 
Forgiving, Most-Merciful . 


The Order to stand on ‘Arafat and to depart from it 


€This Ayah contains Allah’s order to those who stand at ‘Arafat 
to also move on to Al-Muzdalifah, so that they remember Allah 
at Al-Mash‘ar Al-Haram. Allah commands the Muslim to stand 
with the rest of the pilgrims at ‘Arafat, unlike Quraysh who 
(before Islam) used to remain in the sanctuary, near Al- 
Muzdalifah, saying that they are the people of Allah’s Town and 


0) Ahmad 4:82. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (175 - 200) (Part-2 565 


the servants of His House. Al-Bukhari reported that ‘A’ishah 
said, “Quraysh and their allies, who used to be called Al- 
Hums"'| , used to stay in Al-Muzdalifah while the rest of the 
Arabs would stand at ‘Arafat. When Islam came, Allah com- 
manded His Prophet #% to stand at ‘Arafat and then proceed 
from there. Hence Allah’s statement: 


Faas PA bt ue on 


¢...from the place whence all the people depart.>'! 


This was also said by Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, ‘Ata’, Qatadah 
and As-Suddi and others.'*! Ibn Jarir chose this opinion and 
said that there is [jmda‘ (a consensus among the scholars) for 
it. 

Im&ém Ahmad reported that Jubayr bin Mut‘iim said, “My 
camel was lost and I went out in search of it on the day of 
‘Arafah, and I saw the Prophet 3% standing in ‘Arafat. I said to 
myself, ‘By Allah he is from the Hums. What has brought him 
here?” This Hadith is also reported in the Sahihayn.!° 

Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that ‘depart’ 
mentioned in the Ayah refers to proceeding from Al-Muzdalifah 
to Mina to stone the pillars.'©! Allah knows best. 


Asking Allah for His Forgiveness 
Allah said: 
LoS SAS Nh coy TH Ke shy 
¢...and ask Allah for His forgiveness. Truly, Allah is Oft- 
Forgiving, Most-Merciful .> 
Allah frequently orders remembrance of Him after acts of 
worship are finished. Muslim reported that Allah’s Messenger 
3% used to ask Allah for His forgiveness thrice after the prayer 


1 Literally, “strictly religious”, Quraysh were called so, as they used 


to say, “We are the people of Allah, we do not go out of the 
sanctuary.” 

Fath Al-Bari 8:35. 

At-Tabari 4:186-187. 

4] Ahmad 4:80. 

(5! Fath Al-Bari 3 :602, and Muslim 2:894. 

ll Fath Al-Bari 8:35. 


|2 
[3 


— — 


566 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


is finished.'"! It is reported in the Two Sahihs that the Prophet 
# encouraged Tasbih (saying Subhdn Allah, i.e., Glorified is 
Allah), Tahmid (saying Al-Hamdu Lilldh, i.e., praise be to Allah) 
and Takbir (saying Allahu Akbar, i. es “Allah is the Most Great) 
thirty-three times each (after prayer). 

Ibn Marduwyah collected the aa that Al-Bukhari 
reported from Shaddad bin Aws, who stated that Allah’s 
Messenger 3 said: 

Gly le ey EY ts SUT gin dad 8 Of gles Vt Stoo 
yf bce ie Je iv ay 3421 oC abe U $3845 ner APTS tl; ae 
ae ra 38 Oo a ate oe a € a 
aH 55 OS wy 6 WE ay Sah $55 oI 6 Cl a 


‘The master of supplication for forgiveness, is for the servant to 
say: ‘O Allah! You are my Lord, there is no deity worthy of 
worship except You. You have created me and I am Your 
servant. I am on Your covenant, as much as I can be, and 
awaiting Your promise. I seek refuge with You from the evil 
that I have committed. I admit Your favor on me and admit my 
faults. So forgive me, for none except You forgives the sins.’ 
Whoever said these words at night and died that same night 
will enter Paradise. Whoever said it during the day and died 
will enter Paradise.»'°! 


Furthermore, it is reported in the Two Sahihs that ‘Abdullah 
bin ‘Amr said that Abu Bakr said, “O Messenger of Allah! 
Teach me an invocation so that | may invoke (Allah) with it in 
my prayer. He told me to say: 


Jeb ty on a WG es cb Le Sib Jy tabi: gh 

eer Ml jill SHE BY to51y Bute ty Hake 
tAllahumma inni zalamtu nafsi zulman kathiran, wa la 
yaghfirudh-dhuniba illa Anta faghfirli maghfiratan min ‘indika, 
war-hamni innaka Antal-Ghafiir-ur-Rahim (O Allah! I have 
done great injustice to myself and none except You forgives 


11] Muslim 1:414. 
[2] Fath AL-BGri 2:378 and Muslim 1:417. 
131 Fath AL-Bari 11:100. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 567 


sins, so please forgive me and be merciful to me as You are the 
Forgiver, the Merciful) .»!| 


There are many other Hadiths on this subject. 
Loc Vey SN HN phat SOS i Wee ES AS yp 
FAS gE & EH Ly AG Gal g Ge C5 De oF oct 


4. 


4 Get sia 1% 42 wer £ aos 
ADH WN Side Gs ae ae 


Se 
\ 


35 He GM g ewe HH LAs 
€200. So when you have accomplished your Manasik, remember 
Allah as you remember your forefathers or with far more 
remembrance. But of mankind there are some who say: “Our 


Lord! Give us (Your bounties) in this world!” and for such 
there will be no portion in the Hereafter .> 


€201. And of them there are some who say: “Our Lord! Give 
us in this world that which is good and in the Hereafter that 
which is good, and save us from the torment of the Fire!’’> 


4202. For them there will be alloted a share for what they have 
earned. And Allah is swift at reckoning .> 


The Order for Remembrance of Allah and seeking Good 
in this Life and the Hereafter upon completing the Rites 
of Hajj 

Allah commands that He be remembered after the rituals are 
performed. 


tiie SK> 
<...as you remember your forefathers> 


Said bin Jubayr said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “During the time 
of Jdhiliyyah, people used to stand during the (Haj) season, 
and one of them would say, ‘My father used to feed (the poor), 
help others (end their disputes, with his money), pay the 
Diyah (i.e., blood money),’ and so forth. The only Dhikr that 
they had was that they would remember the deeds of their 
fathers. Allah then revealed to Muhammad 3%: 


(1 Fath AL-Bari 13 :484 and Muslim 4:2078. 


568 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
€ ery IN Peete SSE Si yentt> 
<Remember Allah as you remember your forefathers or with far 


more remembrance .>""! 


Therefore, remembering Allah the Exalted and Ever High is 
always encouraged. We should mention that when Allah used 
“or” in the Ayah, He meant to encourage the people to 
remember Him more than they remember their forefathers, not 
that the word entails a doubt (as to which is larger or bigger). 
This statement is similar to the Aydt: 


Seog tH¢ No I % ¢ 
455-5 aah N ede oid 
¢...as stones or even worse in hardness> (2:74) and, 
CEiS SE Sl AN ES it sep 
€...fear men as they fear Allah or even more} (4:77) and, 
Ew—oiy fats jy scish> 
¢And We sent him to a hundred thousand (people) or even 
more> (37:147} and, 
41559 I Ge Ge SY 
And was at a distance of two bows’ length or (even) nearer .> 
(53:9) 
Allah encourages calling Him in supplication after 
remembering Him, because this will make it more likely that 
the supplication will be accepted. Allah also criticizes those 


who only supplicate to Him about the affairs of this life, while 
ignoring the affairs of the Hereafter. Allah said: 


45 & ee Ty Mes Gal 4 Gu Es Ss oF A 5d 
<But of mankind there are some who say: “Our Lord! Give us 


(Your bounties) in this world!” and for such there will be no 
portion in the Hereafter.> 


meaning, they have no share in the Hereafter. This criticism 
serves to discourage other people from imitating those 


1! thn Abi Hatim 2:530. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 569 


mentioned. 

Said bin Jubayr said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Some bedouins 
used to come to the standing area (‘Arafat) and supplicate 
saying, ‘O Allah! Make it a rainy year, a fertile year and a year 
of good child bearing.’ They would not mention any of the 
affairs of the Hereafter. Thus, Allah revealed about them: 


45% & el Sy 865 Gal g Ge Js os cil <> 


<But of mankind there are some who say: “Our Lord! Give us 
(Your bounties) in this world!” and for such there will be no 
portion in the Hereafter .> 


The believers who came after them used to say: 


ENO DIE 5 KS 5 ce EN g ae KD 
Our Lord! Give us in this world that which is good and in the 
Hereafter that which is good, and save us from the torment of 
the Fire!’’> 


Next, Allah revealed: 
a Fe. 8 poe 7 ose a ak 
Sd BA OG oT Ge Ses 54) Aap 


€For them there will be alloted a share for what they have 
earned. And Allah is swift at reckoning .> 


Hence, Allah praised those who ask for the affairs of both 
this life and the Hereafter. He said: 


Ae G5 Kae are 35 ce EM yg ne HH Ss 
<And of them there are some who say: “Our Lord! Give us in 
this world that which is good and in the Hereafter that which is 


good, and save us from the torment of the Fire!’’> 


The supplication mentioned and praised in the Ayah 
includes all good aspects of this life and seeks refuge from all 
types of evil. The good of this life concerns every material 
request of well-being, spacious dwelling, pleasing mates, 
sufficient provision, beneficial knowledge, good profession or 
deeds, comfortable means of transportation and good praise, 
all of which the scholars of Tafsir have mentioned regarding 
this subject. All of these are but a part of the good that is 
sought in this life. 


570 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


As for the good of the Hereafter, the best of this includes 
acquiring Paradise, which also means acquiring safety from 
the greatest horror at the gathering place. It also refers to 
being questioned lightly and the other favors in the Hereafter. 

As for acquiring safety from the Fire, it includes being 
directed to what leads to this good end in this world, such as 
avoiding the prohibitions, sins of all kinds and doubtful 
matters. 

Al-Qasim bin ‘Abdur-Rahm4n said, “Whoever is gifted with a 
grateful heart, a remembering tongue and a patient body, will 
have been endowed with a good deed in this life, a good deed 
in the Hereafter and saved from the torment of the Fire.”!!! 

This is why the Sunnah encourages reciting this Du‘a’ (i.e., 
in the Ayah about gaining a good deed in this life and the 
Hereafter). Al-Bukhari reported that Anas bin Malik narrated 
that the Prophet #% used to say: 


q (oa Cee Le eee we Sse ae eter pee 3 58 
OO Side G5 dens eV 35 Eos GU 3 GIGS cabin 


tO Allah, our Lord! Give us that which is good in this life, 
that which is good in the Hereafter and save us from the 
torment of the Fire»! 


Imam Ahmad reported that Anas said, “Allah’s Messenger # - 
visited a Muslim man who had become as weak as a sick small 
bird. Allah’s Messenger # said to him, ‘Were you asking or 
supplicating to Allah about something?’ He said, ‘Yes. I used to 
say: O Allah! Whatever punishment you saved for me in the 
Hereafter, give it to me in this life.’ Allah’s Messenger #¢ said: 


Sis (GM 3 an Ch cb ts nes Vf ¥ at See 

1G NO 5s 5 Ee eT 5 
tAll praise is due to Allah! You cannot bear it -or stand it-. 
You should have said: €Our Lord! Give us in this world that 


which is good and in the Hereafter that which is good, and save 
us from the torment of the Fire!>» 


The man began reciting this Du‘4d and he was cured.”!%l 
(1) Ibn Abi Hatim 2 :542. 

[2] Fath Al-Bari 8:35. 

(31 Ahmad 3:107. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 571 


ry ean ear i also recorded 

Pee aerate ett) eT it. 
: et heh Gilly Ei Al-Hakim reported 
ate Se Pls 45 4 Se 5 wy || that Said bin Jubayr 
P Kode TOIL ote Tee AE said, “A man came to 
adobe (pail as Ibn ‘Abbas and said, 
‘I worked for some 
people and settled for 
a part of my 
compensation in 
return for their taking 
me to perform Hajj 
with them. Is this 
acceptable?’ Ibn 
‘Abbas said, ‘You are 


among those whom 
Allah described: 


Mytl BX Gb 
2 LOLA EDT o fe 4 rica | Car 3 A 
Y anal ale CEN pp Sanat ¢For them there will be 
N15 5255. 1% € || alloted a share for what 
they have earned. And 
Allah is swift at 
reckoning .>'?) 
Al-Hakim then commented; "This Hadith is authentic 


according to the criteria of the Two Shaykhs (Al-Bukhari and 
Muslim) although they did not record it." 


Ate oe Ao hy ZEKE ewer 6 Fe eg we ware) “gs ; rey dS, ote 
FG 5 le BSG OS a AS 5 Shi acl a GI IYER sep 
oi rh ME 


CE 57EE od, EN ALG ai (5G GE Be HH 


4203. And remember Allah during the Appointed Days. But 
whosoever hastens to leave in two days, there is no sin on him 
and whosoever stays on, there is no sin on him, if his aim is to 
do good and obey Allah (fear Him), and know shat you will 
surely be gathered unto Him.> 


1) Muslim 4 :2068. 
[2] Al-Hakim 2 :277. 


572 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Remembering Allah during the Days of Tashrig - Days of 
Eating and Drinking 

Ibn ‘Abbas said, The Appointed Days are the Days of Tashriq 
(11-12-13th of Dhul-Hijjah) while the Known Days are the 
(first) ten (days of Dhul-Hijjah).”"! dkrimah said that: 

qpGLE paid HERG) 
<And remember Allah during the Appointed Days.> 

means reciting the Takbir — Allahu Akbar, Alladhu Akbar, 
during the days of Tashriq after the compulsory prayers.! 


Imam Ahmad reported that Uqbah bin ‘Amr said that 
Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 


81 GT gad pl GAT Che oa, ti pu AUN pgs oe pe 
‘The day of ‘Arafah (9th of Dhul-Hijjah), the day of the 
Sacrifice (10th) and the days of the Tashriq (11-12-13th) are our 
‘Id (festival) for we people of Islam. These are days of eating 
and drinking .»!*) 

Imam Ahmad reported that Nubayshah Al-Hudhali said that 

Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 
tail 355 54, ysl pal 5. EN oth 

tThe days of Tashriq are days of eating, drinking and Dhikr 
(remembering) of Allah.» 

Muslim also recorded this Hadith!) 

We also mentioned the Hadith of Jubayr bin Mut‘im: 


eA GS ge A Gly Says WE Sze 
‘All of ‘Arafat is a standing place and all of the days of Tashriq 
are days of Sacrifice .»'*! 
We also mentioned the Hadith by ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Ya‘mar 


(1! Al-Qurtubi 3:3. 

(2) Ibn Abi Hatim 2 :545. 

{3} Ahmad 4 :152. 

(4) Ahmad 5:75, and Muslim 2 :800. 
IS! Anmad 4:82. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2 573 
Ad-Diryli: 
cathe (HG SSE tay ole HG yoy 3 Ga 3 Sot ep pth 
‘The days of Mina (Tashrig) are three. Those who hasten in 
two days then there is no sin in it, and those who delay (i.e., 
remain in Mina for a third day) then there is no sin in it.!") 


Ibn Jarir reported that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah’s 
Messenger 2% said: 


eat 355 pth Gul ga An euch 
‘The days of Tashriq are days of eating and remembering 
Allah» 


Ibn Jarir reported that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah’s 
Messenger #3 sent ‘Abdullah bin Hudhafah to Mina proclaiming: 


the5 3 at 335 orks ST cel ae pe ci 
‘Do not fast these days (i.e., Tashriq days), for they are days 


of eating, drinking and remembering Allah the Exalted and 
Most Honored .»!?! 


The Appointed Days 


Miqsam said that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Appointed Days 
are the days of Tashrig, four days: the day of the Sacrifice 
(10th of Dhul-Hijjah) and three days after that.'*! 

This opinion was also reported of Ibn Umar, Ibn Az-Zubayr, 
Abu Musa, ‘Ata’, Mujahid, Ikrimah, Said bin Jubayr, Abu 
Malik, Ibrahim An-Nakhai, Yahya bin Abu Kathir, Al-Hasan, 
Qatadah, As-Suddi, Az-Zuhri, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak, 
Mugatil bin Hayyan, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani, Malik bin Anas, and 
others.'*! In addition, the apparent meaning of the following 
Ayah supports this opinion: 


<But whosoever hastens to leave in two days, there is no sin on 
"' Abu Dawud 2:485. 
71 At-Tabari 4:211. 


(3! At-Tabari 4:213. 
(41 fbn Abi Hatim 2:547-549. 


574 : Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


him and whosoever stays on, there is no sin on him.> 
So the Ayah hints to the three days after the day of 
Sacrifice. 
Allah’s statement: 


4p gah 4 Ht Weib> 
€And remember Allah during the Appointed Days> 
directs remembering Allah upon slaughtering the animals, 
after the prayers, and by Dhikr (supplication) in general. It also 
includes Takbir and remembering Allah while throwing the 


pebbles every day during the Tashriq days. A Hadith that Abu 
Dawud and several others collected states: 


aul 3 “BY gic '3 3552) aSst : on fests gait Sj Aves va} 
dt3 3 


(Tawaf around the House, Sa‘i between As-Safa and Al- 

Marwah and throwing the pebbles were legislated so that Allah 

is remembered in Dhikr.s!"| 

When mentioning the first procession (refer to 2:199) and the 
second procession of the people upon the end of the Hajj 
season, when they start to return to their areas, after they had 
gathered during the rituals and at the standing places, Allah 
said, 
ditt s ach pea LEG ait (55> 
qand obey Allah (fear Him), and know that you will surely be 
gathered unto Him.> 


Similarly, Allah pas 
4a 285 EM g ST cll > 
€And it is He Who has created you on the earth, and to Him 
you shall be gathered back.} (23:79) 
ail 385 ad g Ge dl ABs Gal goat a AS SF Lt ay 
8G 4G Sal as Gs LH BAT gy ye Gy as 


AG Be RS yt ii “5h at ff 1 3 15 iis) 3 


= 


4 


» 


(1 Abu Dawud 2:447. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 575 


~ 3 te 


jo pete 4s o a < ‘: Ps Z\¢ 2 nda Sy te 
L545 ah af ide Ace sa SO wt Mukai 


4204. And of mankind there is he whose speech may please you 
(O Muhammad #3), in this worldly life, and he calls Allah to 
witness as to that which is in his heart, yet he is the most 
quarrelsome of the opponents .> 


€205. And when he turns away (from you O Muhammad 3), 
his effort in the land is to make mischief therein and to destroy 
the crops and the cattle, and Allah likes not mischief>. 


4206. And when it is said to him, “Fear Allah’, he is led by 
arrogance to (more) crime. So enough for him is Hell, and 
worst indeed is that place to rest!> 


€207. And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking 
the pleasure of Allah. And Allah is full of kindness to (His) 
servants .> 


The Characteristics of the Hypocrites 


As-Suddi said that these Aydt were revealed about Al- 
Akhnas bin Shariq Ath-Thagafi who came to Allah’s Messenger 
# and announced his Islam although his heart concealed 
otherwise.!! 

Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that these Aydt were revealed about 
some of the hypocrites who criticized Khubayb and his 
companions who were killed during the Raji‘ incident.!?! 
Thereafter, Allah sent down His condemnation of the 
hypocrites and His praise for Khubayb and his companions: 


iil ics TT CS oS UH a5 
€And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the 
pleasure of Allah .> 


It was also said that they refer to the hypocrites and the 
believers in general.!5] This is the opinion of Qatadah, 


Cl at-Tabari 4:229. 

(2! When ‘Adal and Qarah tribes killed the ten Companions whom the 
Prophet 3% sent to teach them the Qur’an and Islam. 

'3) At-Tabari 4:230. 


576 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Mujahid, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and several others, and it is 
correct. . 

Ibn Jarir related that Al-Qurazi said that Nawf Al-Bikali, who 
used to read (previous Divine) Books said, “I find the 
description of some members of this Ummah in the previously 
revealed Books of Allah: they (hypocrites) are people who use 
the religion to gain material benefit. Their tongues are sweeter 
than honey, but their hearts are more bitter than Sabir (a 
bitter plant, aloe). They show the people the appearance of 
sheep while their hearts hide the viciousness of wolves. Allah 
said, They dare challenge Me, but they are deceived by Me. I 
swear by Myself that I will send a Fitnah (trial, calamity) on 
them that will make the wise man bewildered.’ I contemplated 
about these statements and found them in the Qur’an 
describing the hypocrites: 


dosti a GS ail Ags GA Gai g AS Dnt of Al B5> 
¢And of mankind there is he whose speech may please you (O 
Muhammad 3%), in this worldly life, and he calls Allah to 
witness as to that which is in his heart,»""! 
This statement by Al-Qurazi is Hasan Sahih. Allah said: 
des gu & ail Ly5> 
¢...and he calls Allah to witness as to that which is in his 
heart,> 
This Ayah indicates that such people pretend to be Muslims, 


but defy Allah by the disbelief and hypocrisy that their hearts 
conceal. Similarly Allah said: 


ail Se SABES VG nltl Ge Seep 
<They may hide (their crimes) from men, but they cannot hide 
(them) from Allah .> (4:108) 


This Tafsir was reported from Ibn ‘Abbas!?) by Ibn Ishaq. It 
was also said that the Ayah means that when such people 
announce their Islam, they swear by Allah that what is in 
their hearts is the same of what their tongues are 


I) At-Tabari 4 :232. 
12) At-Tabari 4 :230. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 577 


pronouncing. This is also a correct meaning for the Ayah that 
was chosen by ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam." It is 
also the choice of Ibn Jarir who related it to Ibn ‘Abbas and 
Mujahid. Allah knows best. 
Allah said: 
EahGolt St 55> 
€Yet he is the most Aladd of the opponents .> (2:204) 


The Ayah used the word Aladd here, which literally means 
‘wicked’ (here it means ‘quarrelsome’. A variation of the word 
Ludda was also used in another Ayah: 


45S oo 535) 
€So that you (Muhammad) warn with it (the Qur'an) a Ludda 
people.> (19:97) 

Hence, a hypocrite lies, alters the truth when he quarrels 
and does not care for the truth. Rather, he deviates from the 
truth, deceives and becomes most quarrelsome. It is reported 
in Sahih that Allah’s Messenger # said: 

Sod OE ING 5b SE Hy 045 S35 ty Sod ge Sh 
‘The signs of a hypocrite are three: Whenever he speaks, he 
tells a lie. Whenever he promises, he always breaks it (his 
promise). If you have a dispute with him, he is most 
quarrelsome .»!? 


Imam Bukhari reported that ‘A'ishah narrated that the 
Prophet # said: 


ead IYI at Sh Jue Gail Op 
‘The most hated person to Allah is he who is Aladd and 


Khasim (meaning most quarrelsome) .»!°) 
Allah then said: 


2S @ pte 4 tee tere ode »_e7¢ mt; 2 - fo ee 
oe ¥ ob Joh Sal ys Gs 2 eM g wo TF > 


cd 


[4 At-Tabari 4:233. 
[21 Fath Al-Bari 1:111. 
(3) Fath ALBari 8:36. 


578 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


And when he turns away (from you O Muhammad), he 
struggles in the land to make mischief therein and to destroy the 
crops and the cattle, and Allah likes not mischief. > 


This Ayah indicates that such persons are deviant in the 
tongue, evil in the deeds, their words are fabricated, their 
belief is wicked and their works are immoral. The Ayah used 
the (Arabic word) Sa‘ (literally, ‘tries’ or ‘intends)}. This word 
was also used to describe Pharaoh: 


ecdNt Gl Jee SS GaN BM th IG as 7G SSS ABD 
<Then he turned his back, Yas‘a (striving hard against Allah). 
Then he gathered (his people) and cried aloud saying, ‘I am 
your lord, most high.’ So Allah, seized him with a punishing 


example for his last and first transgression. Verily, in this is an 
instructive admonition for whosoever fears Allah.» (79:22-26) 


[Sa‘a was also used in the Ayah]: 
Cail Sy Sy GLE REIT AF ye Gd oo} 14 GK Salt Ge 


€O you who believe (Muslims)! When the call is proclaimed for 
the Salah (prayer) on the day of Friday (Jumu‘ah prayer), 
As‘aw come to the remembrance of Allah.» (62:9) 


This Ayah means, ‘(when the call to the Friday prayer is 
announced) intend and then proceed to attend the Friday 
prayer.’ We should mention that hastening to the mosque is 
condemed by the Sunnah (as this is another meaning for the 
word Sa‘d): 


Us, Sco Soles Gy Syed 8 a HE 6 sole fide 
«When you come to attend the prayer, do not come in a Sa‘i 


(haste). Rather, come to it while walking at ease and in peace 
(or grace) .»!"! 


The hypocrite has no motive in this life but to cause mischief 
and to destroy the crops and the offspring, including what the 
animals produce and what the people depend on for their 
livelihood. Mujahid said, “If the hypocrite strives for mischief 


11 Muslim 1:420. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) _ a79 


in the land, Allah prevents the rain from falling and thus the 
crops and the offspring perish.” The Ayah continues: 


as 


Noa 22 ¥ ah> 


¢...and Allah likes not mischief.> that is, Allah does not like those 
who possess these characteristics, or those who act like this. 


Rejecting Advice is Characteristic of the Hypocrites 
Allah said: 
¢ HY SE SSN it wl 4 Sea N5> 
¢And when it is said to him, “Fear Allah’, he is led by 
arrogance to (more) crime .> 


This Ayah indicates that when the hypocrite, who deviates in 
his speech and deeds, is advised and commanded to fear 
Allah, refrain from his evil deeds and adhere to the truth, he 
refuses and becomes angry and outraged, as he is used to 
doing evil. This Ayah is similar to what Allah said: 

ph Tat OE Os oo SS oe a at E app 
i 635 SO KS a 3 KU Be HE oo lt os 
dw nell Bye <i 
¢And when Our clear verses are recited to them, you will 
notice a denial on the faces of the disbelievers! They are nearly 
ready to attack with violence those who recite Our verses to 
them. Say: “Shall I tell you of something worse than that? The 
Fire (of Hell) which Allih has promised to those who 
disbelieved, and worst indeed is that destination!» (22:72) 


This is why in this Ayah, Allah said: 
Cai is ae Lp 


<So enough for him is Hell, and worst indeed is that »lace to 
rest> 


meaning, the Fire is enough punishment for the hypocrite. 


The Sincere Believer prefers pleasing Allah 
Allah said: 


ag oa Oana a Cs 3 - ct} 1 < 
dail icky ee Eo Bs tt 05> 


580 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the 
pleasure of Allah .> 


After Allah described the evil characteristics of the 
hypocrites, He mentioned the good qualities of the believers. 
Allah said: 


Cail pice Aa EE og Ss A 5 


¢And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the 
pleasure of Allah .> 


Ibn ‘Abbas, Anas, Said bin Musayyib, Abu Uthman An- 
Nahdi, ‘Tkrimah and several other scholars said that this Ayah 
was revealed about Suhayb bin Sinan Ar-Rimi. When Suhayb 
became 4 Muslim in Makkah and intended to migrate (to Al- 
Madinah), the people (Quraysh) prevented him from migrating 
with his money. They said that if he forfeits his property, he is 
free to migrate. He abandoned his money and preferred to 
migrate, and Allah revealed this Ayah about him. ‘Umar bin 
Khattab and several other Companions met Suhayb close to 
the outskirts of Al-Madinah at Al-Harrah (flat lands with black 
stones). They said to him, “The trade has indeed been 
successful.” He answered them, “You too, may Allah never 
allow your trade to fail. What is the matter?” Umar told him 
that Allah has revealed this Ayah (2:207) about him. It was 
also reported that Allah’s Messenger 2% said, “The trade has 
been successful, O Suhayb!"!! 

The meaning of the Ayah (2:207) includes every Mujahid in 
the way of Allah. Allah said in another Ayah: 

Sg SAS Eo 25 oh Al acl eli <, hl at &> 
ae bee ae oe AB On 


“54 3 JG pay aye 3 ds aitle \Se5 Lg BS a 

KAT YN Ss Sy AN ol Kon Wt At aie 
«Verily, Allah has purchased of the believers their lives and 
their properties for (the price) that theirs shall be the Paradise. 
They fight in Allah’s cause, so they kill (others) and are killed. 


It is a promise in truth which is binding on Him in the Tawrah 
and the Injil and the Qur'an. And who is truer to his covenant 


OY At-Tabari 4 :248. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 581 


than Allah? Then rejoice in the bargain which you have 
concluded. That is the supreme success.> (9:111) 


When Hisham bin ‘Amr penetrated the lines of the enemy, 


some people criticized him. ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab and Abu 
Hurayrah refuted them and recited this Ayah: 


ibe se . do pete 42 a et bie ge “4, - 
Cima, Yay5 ih ail cae dice A St aT 5p 


¢And of mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure 
of Allah. And Allah is full of kindness to (His) servants .> 


2S ju coset ins 5 lee Lal g Re an St ee 
Sap Sh Saab Lh peak oa bs AS gs ES he peal 
€208. O you who believe! Enter Silm perfectly, and follow not 
the footsteps of Shaytan (Satan). Verily, he is to you a plain 
enemy .> 

€209. Then if you slide back after the clear signs (Prophet 


Muhammad 3%, and this Qur'an and Islam) have come to you, 
then know that Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise>. 


Entering Islam in its Entirety is obligated 


Allah commands His servants who believe in Him and have 
faith in His Messenger #% to implement all of Isl4m’s legislation 
and law, to adhere to all of its commandments, as much as 
they can, and to refrain from all of its prohibitions. ‘Al-‘Awfi 
said that Ibn ‘Abbas said, and also Mujahid, Tawas, Ad- 
Dahhak, ‘Tkrimah, Qatadah, As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd said that 
Allah’s statement: 

<i g esp 
Enter Silm> means Islam.''! Allah’s statement: 


35> 
<...perfectly> means, in its entirety. This is the Tafsir of Ibn 
‘Abbas, Mujahid, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, ‘Ikrimah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, 
As-Suddi, Mugatil bin Hayyan, Qatédah and Ad-Dahhak.!?! 
(I At-Tabari 4:252, Ibn Abi Hatim 2:584-585. 
2) Ibn Abi Hatim 2 :586-588. 


582 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Mujahid said that the Ayah means, ‘Perform all the good works 
and the various pious deeds, this is especially addressed to 


those rom among the People of the Scripture who embraced 
the faith.” 


Ibn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that: 
46S Hal g WH on it E> 
€O you who believe! Enter Silm perfectly> 


refers to the believers among the People of the Scripture. This 
is because they believed in Allah, some of them still followed 
some parts of the Tawrah and the previous revelations. So 
Allah said: 

CBee Jal gy EI> 
¢Enter Islam perfectly.>'?! Allah thus commanded them to 
embrace the legislation of the religion of Muhammad 3 in its 
entirety and to avoid abandoning any part of it. They should no 
longer adhere to the Tawrah. 

Allah then said: 
Kye ook 1A55 I5> 
¢...and follow not the footsteps of Shaytan> 


meaning, perform the acts of worship and avoid what Satan 
commands you to do. This is because: 


E050 Fa al 6 YS ob Koay Sa, MAE > 
¢He (Shaytan) commands you only what is evil and Fahsha’ 
(sinful), and that you should say about Allah what you know 
not.} (2:169) and: 
Ctl A ASS te ea Cad 
¢He only invites his Hizb (followers) that they may become the 
dwellers of the blazing Fire.} (35:6) 
Hence, Allah said: 
483 She SI Hyd 


"1 Ibn Abi Hatim 2:585. 
21 Tbn Abi Hatim 2 :582. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 583 


<Verily, he is to you an open enemy.> 
Allah said: 
C2 featde a bs AAS Sp 
<Then if you slide back after the clear signs have come to you> 
meaning, if you deviate from the Truth after clear proofs have 
been established against you, 
€ SB al if iet> 
¢...then know that Allah is All-Mighty> in His punishment, and 
no one can escape His vengeance or defeat Him. 
<tecp> 
¢All-Wise> in His decisions, actions and rulings. Hence Abu Al- 
‘Aliyah, Qatadah and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas said, “He is Mighty in 
His vengeance, Wise in His decision.”""! 
At 5 OAT 335 teas wait & yib 3 ait oak J My ays Jap 


~~ 


<x a8 sof 


4 ve 
HS oy! ay 


€210. Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah 
should come to them over the shadows of the clouds and the 
angels? (Then) the case would be already judged. And to Allah 
return all matters (for decision) .> 


Do not delay embracing the Faith 
Cie ds Acil os yh 9 Hee SY, Ske Sap 
<Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah should 


come to them over the shadows of the clouds and the angels? 
on the Day of Resurrection to judge the early and the latter 
creations. Allah shall then reward each according to his or her 
deeds; and whoever does good shall see it, and whoever does 
evil shall see it. This is why Allah said: 

CAN GS AI Ss NT 585d 
<(Then) the case would be already judged. And to Allah return 
all matters (for decision) .> 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 2:59. 


584 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


iE ya Similarly, Allah 
said: 


ore foe ve eae PST x , 
csicsiisaceemsbciglc |e 
2 ie oat F i 320 6 Ni 3 3) 6 
Bip 6) SEN AS 64 ; 


oe Sette, fhe wep 56g 
fee oo be ee etyeh ec tee 306 co ws ay ay in 83 
Seal stg gait rere it e.y a ad 
SUL? 7 Bb oe, wor eB S98 07S. oe ales whe 

pie 4 OY pity accalle sy Bip lyst er eee 
ior Savrecrrs 7 “tc ri RAN 5 se ey a2 

Ly Be Ge ARORE SMTA REIS CO) ei oe ne 
eos eee v4 €or Si 

até Soa Loss Inert b345 

as ae ae eee ae «Nay! When the earth 
MAGI ps Gries slesics is ground to powder. 
ne BVA 655 ae weclae 4 Siesciew And your Lord comes 
with the angels in rows. 


etd o see eay 


Si And Hell will be 


cit Bd Oo hate brought near that Day. 
ipa (oh cis 1G ks On that Day will man 


Areal Ai (el tk ol (SES A 6 remember, but how will 
A205 PACATAR ITA that remembrance (then) 
ANGI INL EGS | conil him?) (89:21-23) 


eae Che @eji0s (5 avi and: 

SAS IGS Toss 64 at we AY Se ep 
OA cw dlip C5 licsusaalyh | Oe tao ab ot a 
40) eile ae 
€Do they then wait for anything other than that the angels 
should come to them, or that your Lord (Allah) should come, or 


that some of the signs of your Lord should come (i.e., portents 
of the Hour, e.g., rising of the sun from the west)!> (6:158) 


Abu Ja‘far Razi reported that Abu Al-‘Aliyah narrated that: 
4.43 2 “it MH es ya 3 a at 4G PAI Yy Ss ye Aye 2 ja> 
¢Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah should 
come to them over the shadows of the clouds and the angels? 


means, the angels will descend on the shadows of clouds, 
while Allah comes as He wills.''! Some of the reciters read it, 


ae 


ae ar4 


OY At-Tabari 4:264. 


Strah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 585 


AH 5 yi 4 ea sd5 “it 4 AY by? i 


Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah should 
come to them and also the angels over the shadows of the 
clouds. 


This is similar to Allah’s other statement: 
qo: uA Kaiti Bs call wen Sais eT 2 


¢And Gemeaies) the Day when the heaven shall be rent 
asunder with clouds, and the angels will be sent down, with a 
grand descending .> (25:25) 


ee ee w dcp 
Wit Salts fin Sole GR GO ell LES oh Bm yGN 432 
MNS BAG SAG a seal te me 


4211. Ask the Children of Israel how many clear Ayat (proofs, 
evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) We gave 
them. And whoever changes Allah’s favor after it has come to 
him, [e.g., renounces the religion of Allah (Islam) and accepts 
Kufr (disbelief)] then surely, Allah is severe in punishment.> 


€212. Beautified is the life of this world for those who 
disbelieve, and they mock at those who believe. But those who 
have Taqwa, will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. 
And Allah gives (of His bounty, blessings, favors, and honors 
on the Day of Resurrection) to whom He wills without limit.> 


The Punishment for changing Allah’s Favor and 
mocking the Believers 


Allah mentioned that the Children of Israel, were witnesses 
to many clear signs that attest to the truth of Moses regarding 
what he was sent with for them. They witnessed his hand 
(when it became lit with light), his parting the sea, his striking 
the rock (and water flowed from the rock), the clouds that 
shaded them during the intense heat, the manna and the 
quails, and so forth. These signs attested to the existence of 
the Creator and the truth of Moses by whose hand these signs 
appeared. Yet, so many among them changed Allah’s favor, by 
preferring disbelief to faith and by ignoring Allah’s favors, 


586 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


ait Of GE G as & it is JE 5 
¢And whoever changes Allah's favor after it had come to him, 
then surely, Allah is severe in punishment.> 

Similarly, Allah said about the disbelievers of Quraysh: 


Gish Ae GT os ea UO at cos OS at OF st 

in il SRS 
¢Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of 
Allah into disbelief, and caused their people to dwell in the 


house of destruction? Hell, in which they will burn, -— and 
what an evil place to settle in!> (14:28, 29) 


Then Allah states that He has made the life of this world 
beautiful for the disbelievers who are satisfied with it, who 
collect wealth, but refrain from spending it on what they have 
been commanded, which could earn them Allah’s pleasure. 
Instead, they ridicule the believers who ignore this life and 
who spend whatever they earn on what pleases their Lord. The 
believers spend seeking Allah’s Face, and this is why they have 
gained the ultimate happiness and the best share on the Day 
of the Return. Therefore, they will be exalted above the 
disbelievers at the Gathering Place, when they are gathered, 
during the resurrection and in their final destination. The 
believers will reside in the highest grades in the utmost highs, 
while the disbelievers will reside in the lowest of lows (in the 
Fire). 

This is why Allah said: 


Ee fy 1G vt BF SGP 
¢And Allah gives to whom He wills without limit .> 


This Ayah indicates that Allah gives sustenance to whomever 
He wills of His servants without count or limit in this and the 
Hereafter. A Hadith has stated (that Allah said): 


cite gal Sal 65 gy 
«O son of Adam! Spend (in Allah's cause) and I (Allah) will 
spend on you 0! 


1] Al-Humaydi 2 :459. 


Surah 2. Al-Baqarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 587 


The Prophet # said: 
V9) 25d os GE a dt Gch 
tO Bilal! Spend and do not fear deprivation from the Owner of 
the Throne 0!" 
Allah said: 
CAE 5B yt of Aidl Tp 

¢...and whatsoever you spend of anything (in Allah’s cause), 
He will replace it.> (34:39) 

In addition, it is reported in the Sahih (that the Prophet 

said): 
tks beh GUN ASST IS oy JS is iS OVE yeL bb 

cE Kus bet abr 329i by ie 

tEvery day two angels come down from heavens and one of 
them says, ‘O Allah! Compensate every person who spends in 
Your cause,’ and the other (angel) says, ‘O Allah! Destroy 
every miser."s|?I 

Also in the Sahih: 


CW S105 Cold Ob ope 5 ELE Chai wy EE 
‘The son of Adam says, ‘My money, my money!’ Yet, what is 
your money except that which you eat and use up, wear and 
tear, and spend in charity and thus keep (in your record). 
Other than that, it will go away and will be left for the people 
(the inheritors) .»'5! 
In addition, Imam Ahmad reported that the Prophet 3% said: 
jie Vos a hy GV ts dug 5 55 V ty 15 lu 
‘The Dunya (life of this world) is the residence of those who 


have no residence, the wealth of those who have no wealth, and 
it is harvested by those who have no sense of reason .»\*! 


() At-Tabarani 10:192. 
(2) Fath AL-Bari 3:357. 
(3) Muslim 4 :2273. 

(4) Ahmad 6:71. 


588 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


baer 40% “cee fe 


Sl Casi i JAS Gets <,ke Fora Se EX5 ti55 Eh 2K Sey 
4605 & BASH AY ws SEI 5 oo asi Ka lt eS 
ws 


vee 


em “ai sig on 4a it Cy Weis Lo ait SIGS 24 ara yt boot 
Bp pre Sy TG 
€213. Mankind was one community and Allah sent Prophets 
with glad tidings and warnings, and with them He sent down 
the Scripture in truth to judge between people in matters 
wherein they differed. And only those to whom (the Scripture) 
was given differed concerning it, after clear proofs had come 
unto them, through hatred, one to another. Then Allah by His 
leave guided those who believed to the truth of that wherein 
they differed. And Allah guides whom He wills to the straight 
path>. 


Disputing, after the Clear Signs have come, indicates 
Deviation 


Ibn Jarir reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “There were ten 
generations between Adam and Nuh, all of them on the 
religion of Truth. They later disputed so Allah sent the 
Prophets as warners and bringers of glad tidings.” He then 
said that this is how ‘Abdullah read the Ayah: 


pack Saety Hf ot Se 
The people were one Ummah and they then disputed ."! 


Al-Hakim recorded this in his Mustadrak and said, “Its 
chain of narrators is Sahih, but they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) 
did not record it.”7! Abu Jafar Razi reported that Abu Al- 
‘Aliyah said that Ubayy bin Ka’‘b read the Ayah as: 


Sng Sp Ae S2BN Goh G5 1 EG nj if on Se 
The people were one Ummah and they then disputed ane ipsa 
sent the Prophets as warners and bringers of glad tidings.! 
‘Abdur-Razzaq said that Ma‘mar said that Qatadah said that 


0) At-Tabari 4:275. 
[2] al-Hakim 2 :546. 
13) At-Tabari 4:78. 


Sdrah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2 589 
Allah’s statement: 
C5505 i RA) ae} 


Mankind was one community> 
means; "They all had the guidance. Then: 


SEN tot ES 1 eG 
They disputed and Allah sent Prophets. 
The first to be sent was Nah."!) 
‘Abdur-Razzaq reported that Abu pee commented on: 


Eetsihy SM Se ay WEN uch Wfte all 20 o> 
€Then Allah by His leave guided those who believed to the truth 
of that wherein they differed .> 
saying that the Prophet 2% said: 
rel ag Bah V5 Ln Osh BAF watch 657 SGN S521 Boh 
S55 fe od (HELIS Gn ba at Stl, UE Ce LI 
Gd 25 ad OL ST an tags os 1 cal gdh Sly 
ts5liail) ub kts «2 sel) 
(We are the last (nation), but the first (foremost) on the Day of 
Resurrection. We are the first people to enter Paradise, although 
they (Jews and Christians) have been given the Book before us 
and we after them. Allah has guided us to the truth wherever 
they disputed over it. This is the day (Friday) that they 
disputed about, Allah guided us to it. So, the people follow us, 
as tomorrow is for the Jews and the day after is for the 
Christians .»!?! 


Ibn Wahb related that ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam 
said that his father said about the Awe 


53 Si Sas UAT a es all ai o> 
<€Then Allah by His leave guided those who believed to the truth 
of that wherein they differed .> 
They disputed about the day of Congregation (Friday). The 
0) ‘Abdur-Razzaq 1:82. 
1 ‘abdur-Razzaq 1:82. 


590 _ Tafsir Ibn_Kathir 


Jews made it Saturday while the Christians chose Sunday. 
Allah guided the Ummah of Muhammad 2 to Friday. They also 
disputed about the true Qiblah. The Christians faced the east 
while the Jews faced Bayt Al-Maqdis. Allah guided the Ummah 
of Muhammad 4 to the true Qiblah (Ka‘bah in Makkah). They 
also disputed about the prayer, as some of them bow down, but 
do not prostrate, while others prostrate, but do not bow down. 
Some of them pray while talking and some while walking. Allah 
guided the Ummah of Muhammad # to the truth. They also 
disputed about the fast; some of them fast during a part of the 
day, while others fast from certain types of foods. Allah guided 
the Ummah of Muhammad # to the truth. They also disputed 
about Ibrahim. The Jews said, ‘He was a Jew,’ while the 
Christians considered him Christian. Allah has made him a 
Haniyfan Musliman. Allah has guided the Ummah of 
Muhammad 3% to the truth. 

They also disputed about ‘Isa. The Jews rejected him and 
accused his mother of a grave sin, while the Christians made 
him a god and the son of God. Allah made him by His Word 
and a spirit from (those He created) Him. Allah guided the 
Ummah of Muhammad 3 to the truth.”!! 

Allah then said: 


4-5, > 
<...by His leave) meaning, ‘By His knowledge of them and by 
what He has directed and guided them to,’ according to Ibn 
Jarir.7] Also: 
CSF sab hd 
And Allah guides whom He wilis> 
means from among His creation. (Allah said:) 


tpn Me AD 


¢...to the straight way> meaning, He commands the decision and 
the clear proof. Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported that ‘A’ishah 
narrated that when Allah’s Messenger # used to wake up at 
night to pray, he would say: 


(1) At-Tabari 4:284. 
[2] At-Tabari 4 :286. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 591 


SA Se 2595 SAS bE Janey dates Juice S, sabe 
8 BE gad OAS os IE GS ote So DRS GT ayn 

Ceiine bine NES fa cass il GS Slt js 
«O Allah, the Lord of (angels) Jibril, Mika’il and Israfil, 
Creator of the heavens and earth and Knower of the seen and 
the unseen. You judge between Your servants regarding what 
they have disputed in, so guide me to what have been the 


subject of dispute of the truth by Your leave. Indeed, You guide 
whom You will to the straight path, v!! 


A Du‘é reads: 

Vo Mit 6555 OLE Boul Of) aed G35 és Sai Cf abe 
Cty Sata dey jad ele nal dss 
*O Allah! Show us the truth as truth, and bestow adherence to 
it on us. Show us the evil as evil, and make us stay away from 
it, and do not confuse us regarding the reality of evil so that we 
will not be led astray by it, and make us leaders for the 

believers .»'?1 
BG HU AS KS oe GE al JE KE Se ES Ls p> 
CQES A 75 WS FSS Ae en OSG AB I Es 
4214. Or think you that you will enter Paradise without such 
(trials) as came to those who passed away before you? They 
were afflicted with severe poverty and ailments and were so 
shaken that even the Messenger and those who believed along 


with him said, ‘When (will come) the help of Allah?” Yes! 
Certainly, the help of Allah is near!> 


Victory only comes after succeeding in the Trials 
Allah said: 
CLE SL 
€Or think you that you will enter Paradise> 


(1) Muslim 1:534. 
7) Takhrij AlIhya’ 3:1418. 


592 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


before you are tested and tried just like the nations that came 
before you? This is why Allah said: 


CBG ACU te KS GE gH IS Sh E> 
¢...without such (trials) as came to those who passed away 


before you? They were afflicted with severe poverty and 
ailments> 


meaning, illnesses, pain, disasters and hardships. Ibn Mas‘ad, 
Ibn ‘Abbas, Abu Al-‘Aliyah, Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr, Murrah 
Al-Hamdani, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi‘, As- 
Suddi and Mudgéatil bin Hayyan said that 
4ichii 
¢Al-Ba’sa’> means poverty.!'! Ibn ‘Abbas said that 
EEG 
¢€...and Ad-Darra’> means ailments. 
<ibisd 
dand were so shaken> for fear of the enemy, and were tested, and 
put to a tremendous trial. An authentic Hadith narrated that 
Khabbab bin Al-Aratt said, “We said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! 
Why do you not invoke Allah to support us? Why do you not 
supplicate to Allah for us?’ He said: 
8 YN Bal sols Go ie HE 05 4 lel oe (SIS Su 34 Sp 
Spat V cages ed 85 G was bh bits ae Ye GS Ss Y 
tay 2 AS 
‘The saw would be placed on the middle of the head of one of 
those who were before you (believers) and he would be sawn 
until his feet, and he would be combed with iron combs between 


his skin and bones, yet that would not make him change his 
religion .» 


He then said: 
SUSY yee oy cia Se C5 jan Ze A 1s a B55 apa 
Cis glaasint £55 SESS; vaid le CHING iY) 
(I thn Abi Hatim 2:616. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2 593 


‘By Allah! This matter (religion) will spread (or expand) by 
Allah until the traveler leaves San‘a’ to Hadramawt (both in 
Yemen, but at a great distance from each other) fearing only 
Allah and then the wolf for the sake of his sheep. You are just a 
hasty people .»!") 
And Allah said: 
oe GM CS A Naa Ss an A oh GGT Cot cp sip 
4 iyi SN SL Gao Sal it SLE Fes 
<Alif-Lam-Mim. Do people think that they will be left alone 
because they say: ‘We believe,”’ and will not be tested? And 
We indeed tested those who were before them. And Allah will 
certainly make (it) known (the truth of) those who are true, and 
will certainly make (it) known (the falsehood of) those who are 
liars.» (29:1-3) 
The Companions experienced tremendous trials during the 
battle of Al-Ahzdb (the Confederates). Allah said: 
SCE git a ONT 5 9) Ke JEN Ss GS ot EE AD 
sdiet Se wits SG BE pet aS Gait At ahs, 
CE YAS BS EB ag Gs Salt 
«When they came upon you from above you and from below 
you, and when the eyes grew wild and the hearts reached to the 
throats, and you were harboring doubts about Allah. There, the 
believers were tried and shaken with a mighty shaking. And 
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease (of 


doubts) said: “Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing 
but delusion!’’> (33:10-12) 


When Heraclius asked Abu Sufyan, “Did you fight him 
(Prophet Muhammad)?” He said, “Yes.” Heraclius said, “What 
was the outcome of warfare between you?” Abu Sufyan said, 
“Sometimes we lose and sometimes he loses.” He said, “Such 
is the case with Prophets, they are tested, but the final victory 
is theirs.”!?! 

Allah’s statement: 


I'l Fath Al-Bari 6:716. 
(2) Fath Al-Bari 9:25. 


594 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
¢...without (such) (trials) as came to those who passed away 
before you> 

meaning, their way of life. Similarly, Allah said: 


<Then We destroyed men stronger (in power) than these — and 
the example of the ancients has passed away (before them)» 
(43:8) and: 

CN 5 SE AS Mane ods SL TE y35> 
¢...were so shaken that even the Messenger and those who 
believed along with him said, “When (will come) the help of 
Allah ."’> 


They pleaded (to Allah) for victory against their enemies and 


invoked Him for aid and deliverance from their hardships and 
trials. Allah said: 


€Yes! Certainly, the help of Allah is near!> 
Allah said: 
(O8 Sew be sep 
Verily, along with every hardship is relief. Verily, along with 
every hardship is relief.» (94:5, 6) 
So just as there is hardship, its equal of relief will soon 
arrive. This is why Allah said: 
€Enp al Foy Vp 
€Yes! Certainly, the help of Allah is near!> 


GG EG SIG GGG gash 2 oi ENG Shs we ety 

WDE oy BIOS FS GE 5 cal 
€215. They ask you (O Muhammad 3%) what they should 
spend. Say: “Whatever you spend of good must be for parents 
and kindred and orphans and Al-Masakin (the poor) and the 
wayfarer, and whatever you do of good deeds, truly, Allah 


Sitrah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) _595 


Behe vt PEG knows it well.’’> 
adem 6 por tht Bese Av ces ne eB 
PS GCE? aso; 29 SLA Saale os 
ris NEES SAH w, »...... | Who deserves the 
4 Peacalz 2 i n% 2% ae ch ae oe 

peg th 92S ON gent 9 Jo~ i | Nafaqah (Spending 

otf 2 Al ALee g Ting 4K 7 0 8% fo 
ile Kaos GM LBL Ns 5 5 or Charity) 
aes oe ae ee eee Mugatil bin Hayyan 
4 a“ a ad a . “eo Ge ry vo J 
iho Diagn $ 4.5 SIGS sddiselrl! | caid that this Ayah 
Shes Ai 2633 ia Gates was revealed about 
Bed cache a dente, Be ZF 44e o telee, the voluntary 
LBM Y 5 jolene A calyailice || charity.!"| The Ayah 
s gee eri yes of od - 2,45 2- ll means, They ask you 
a . { We Nest or Spo , 
BRIA Ae EE GQ” Muhammad 2) 
= SAD" Ea 85 Ebest sae Kos how they should 
spend,’ as Ibn ‘Abbas 

and Mujahid have 
stated. So, Allah 


Pa ae oth ah te yf - explained it for them, 
CASS SPF ASN AMG BhAges ee | saving: 
ia 


oa fe 2A sree np oe 4S 74S Poe oe we Ore we ot 
pot SE SES G GY 5 3 G5 oh GAS JS 53 tial G Sep 


ra 


Pa “7% <A, PaaS Oa a a ae 79% 
MAL AAS Is IGG aly cet 


rd See? pore Res * a 1 
eM FoV LNG, BY AS Ga it 


3s 2et se 


Idee Sy I ZC SC mew, , eh be ote. es atte neetee oath tte 
CHA ae ea iG toh cit sch EGG 
4a, -re & 4\0 1b vlerc tt oF ve 6S e * 
“Boys ancs\S\e 4% % 35 A we i €cii 
OURS Hisar 4Say: “Whatever you 
= spend of good must be 
for parents and kindred and orphans and Al-Masakin and _ the 
wayfarer ,”’> 
meaning, spend it on these categories or areas. Similarly, a 
Hadith states (that those who deserve one’s generosity the 
most, are): 


eSust Bush of Suet, Getty Seis Gatto 
‘Your mother, father, sister, brother, the closest and then the 
farthest (relatives) .»!?! 
Maymun bin Mihran once recited this Ayah (2:215) and 
commented, “These are the areas of spending. Allah did not 
mention among them the drums, pipe, wooden pictures, or the 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim 2:619. 
(2) Al-Hakim 3:611. 


596 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


curtains that cover the walls.”!!] 
Next, Allah said: 
COE oy NOP Ee ICS 5p 
€...and whatever you do of good deeds, truly, Allah knows it well .> 
meaning, whatever you perform of good works, Allah knows 
them and He will reward you for them in the best manner, no 
one will be dealt with unjustly, even the weight of an atom. 


Aiclee Bs, 


I yt peed 5 OAKS S pes KS SH dat (ete 2s 
€216. Fighting is ordained for you (Muslims) though you 
dislike it, and it may be that you dislike a thing which is good 


for you and that you like a thing which is bad for you. Allah 
knows but you do not know .> 


Jihad is made Obligatory 

In this Ayah, Allah made it obligatory for the Muslims to 
fight in Jihdd against the evil of the enemy who transgress 
against Islam. Az-Zuhri said, “Jihdd is required from every 
person, whether he actually joins the fighting or remains 
behind. Whoever remains behind is required to give support, if 
support is warranted; to provide aid, if aid is needed; and to 
march forth, if he is commanded to do so. If he is not needed, 
then he remains behind.” It is reported in the Sahih: 


tials ee SU aly ob Li oy He Ay ou gn 
‘Whoever dies but neither fought (i.e., in Allah's cause), nor 


sincerely considered fighting, will die a death of Jahiliyyah (pre- 
Islamic era of ignorance) .»'! 


On the day of Al-Fath (when he conquered Makkah), the 
Prophet 2% said: 
5G SHEN Uy 5 Slee 355 ll LY Ghee Yo 
«There is no Hijrah (migration from Makkah to Al-Madinah) 
after the victory, but only Jihad and good intention. If you were 


[2] Ibn Abi Hatim 2 :620. 
[2] Muslim 3:1517. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 597 


required to march forth, then march forth.»!"| 
Allah’s statement: 


455 Bp 


¢...though you dislike it? means, ‘Fighting is difficult and heavy 
on your hearts.’ Indeed, fighting is as the Ayah describes it, as 
it includes being killed, wounded, striving against the enemies 
and enduring the hardship of travel. Allah then said: 


peed EAs CARS J esd 

¢...and it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for 

you> 
meaning, fighting is followed by victory, dominance over the 
enemy, taking over their lands, money and offspring. Allah 
continues: 

455 8 SR Ss 
¢...and that you like a thing which is bad for you.> 


This Ayah is general in meaning. Hence, one might covet 
something, yet in reality it is not good or beneficial for him, 
such as refraining from joining the Jihad, for it might lead to 
the enemy taking over the land and the government. Then, 
Allah said: 

Cpl F225 fics > 
<Allah knows, but you do not know.> 


meaning, He has better knowledge than you of how things will 
turn out to be in the end, and of what benefits you in this 
earthly life and the Hereafter. Hence, obey Him and adhere to 
His commands, so that you may acquire the true guidance. 


BGG Sai G Heat LNG St Ge BTS wal BD AAT onc 
35 ELS oes of Ke St os Al yy (eee o£ OY ES SS 
Ga oO An ath Haig Gat g isl cus AG jue, 
523 GSN A jut 9 GAGS Lee Sed Yon all ys 


Ol Fath Al-Bari 4:56. 


598 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


4B BAE Oly St 235 
€217. They ask you concerning fighting in the Sacred Months. 
Say, “Fighting therein is a great (transgression) but a greater 
(transgression) with Allah is to prevent mankind from following 
the way of Allah, to disbelieve in Him, to prevent access to Al- 
Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah), and to drive out its inhabitants, 
and Al-Fitnah is worse than killing.” And they will never cease 
fighting you until they turn you back from your religion 
(Islamic Monotheism) if they can. And whosoever of you turns 
back from his religion and dies as a disbeliever, then his deeds 
will be lost in this life and in the Hereafter, and they will be the 
dwellers of the Fire. They will abide therein forever.> 


€218. Verily, those who have believed, and those who have 
emigrated (for Allah’s religion) and have striven hard in the 
way of Allah, all these hope for Allah's mercy. And Allah is 
Oft-Forgiving, Most-Merciful.> 


The Nakhlah Military Maneuvers, and the Ruling on 
Fighting during the Sacred Months 


Ibn Abu Hatim reported that Jundub bin ‘Abdullah said: 
Allah’s Messenger # assembled a group of men under the 
command of Abu ‘Ubaydah bin Jarrah. When he was about to 
march, he started crying for the thought of missing Allah’s 
Messenger #. Consequently, the Messenger # relieved Abu 
‘Ubaydah from command, appointed ‘Abdullah bin Jahsh 
instead, gave him some written instructions and commanded 
him not to read the instructions until he reached such and 
such area. He also said to ‘Abdullah: 


Aol t as sen le dst $6 vo 


«Do not compel any of your men to continue marching with 
you thereafter.» 


When ‘Abdullah read the instructions, he recited Istirja‘ 
[saying, Truly! to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall 
return’; and refer to (2:156)] and said, “I hear and obey Allah 
and His Messenger.” He then told his companions the story 
and read the instructions to them, and two men went back 
while the rest remained. Soon after, they found Ibn Hadrami 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 599 


{one of the disbelievers of Quraysh) and killed him not 
knowing that that day was in Rajab or Jumadi (where Rajab 
is the Sacred Month). The polytheists said to the Muslims, 
“You have committed murder in the Sacred Month.” Allah then 
revealed: 


gy. ees 2 vos olf Ae Bee 
CES 43 NG S43 9G Hii ABI og Giicap 


<They ask you concerning fighting in the Sacred Months. Say, 
“Fighting therein is a great (transgression)..."">"! 


Abdul-Malik bin Hisham, who compiled the Sirah (life story 
of the Prophet 2%), related that Ziyad bin ‘Abdullah Bakka’i said 
that Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar Al-Madani wrote in his 
book on the Sirah, “Allah’s Messenger #% sent ‘Abdullah bin 
Jahsh bin Riyaéb Al-Asadi in Rajab, after he (the Prophet 3) 
came back from the first battle of Badr. The Prophet # sent 
eight people with him, all from among the MuhAjirtin and none 
from the Ansar. He also gave him some written instructions 
and ordered him not to read them until he marched for two 
days. ‘Abdullah should then read the instructions and march to 
implement them, but should not force any of those who were 
with him to accompany him. 

The companions of ‘Abdullah bin Jahsh were all from the 
Muhfjirin, from the tribe of Banu ‘Abd Shams bin ‘Abd 
Manaf, there was Abu Hudhayfah bin ‘Utbah bin Rabi‘ah bin 
‘Abd Shams bin ‘Abd Manaf. From their allies, there was 
‘Abdullah bin Jahsh, who was the commander of the army 
unit, and Ukkashah bin Mihsan from the tribe of Banu Asad 
bin Khuzaymah. From the tribe of Banu Nawfal bin ‘Abd 
Manaf, there was Utbah bin Ghazwan bin Jabir, one of their 
allies. From the tribe of Banu Zuhrah bin Kilab, there was 
Sa‘d bin Abu Waqaas. From Banu Kab, there were their allies: 
‘Adi bin ‘Amr bin Ar-Rabi‘ah not from the tribe of Ibn Wail; 
Wagqid bin ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abd Manéaf bin ‘Arin bin Tha‘labah 
bin Yarbt‘ from Banu Tamim; and Khalid bin Bukair from the 
tribe of Banu Sa‘d bin Layth, Suhayl bin Bayda’ from Banu 
Al-Harith bin Fihr was also among them. When ‘Abdullah bin 
Jahsh marched for two days, he opened and read the 


!'] Tbn Abi Hatim 2:628. 


600 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


(Prophet’s) instructions, “When you read these instructions, 
march until you set camp at Nakhlah between Makkah and 
At-Taif. There, watch the movements of the caravan of 
Quraysh and collect news about them for us.” When ‘Abdullah 
bin Jahsh read the document, he said, “I hear and obey.” He 
then said to his companions, “Allah’s Messenger # has 
commanded me to march forth to Nakhlah to watch the 
movements of the caravan of Quraysh and to inform him about 
their news. He has prohibited me from forcing any of you (to go 
with me). So, those who seek martyrdom, they should march 
with me. Those who dislike the idea of martyrdom, let them 
turn back. Surely, I will implement the command of Allah’s 
Messenger #3.” He and his companions continued without any 
of them turning back. 


‘Abdullah entered the Hijaz area (western Arabia) until he 
reached an area called Buhran, close to Furu‘. There, Sa‘d bin 
Abu Waqqas and ‘Utbah bin Ghazwan lost the camel that they 
were riding in turns, and they went back to search for it while 
‘Abdullah bin Jahsh and the rest of his companions continued 
until they reached Nakhlah. Then, a caravan belonging to the 
Quraysh passed by carrying raisins, food stuff and some trade 
items for the Quraysh. ‘Amr bin Hadrami, whose name was 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbad, was in the caravan, as well as Uthman 
bin ‘Abdullah bin Al-Mughirah and his brother Nawfal bin 
‘Abdullah from the tribe of Makhzam, and Al-Hakam bin 
Kaysan, a freed slave of Hisham bin Al-Mughirah. When they 
saw the Companions they were frightened, but when they saw 
Ukkashah bin Mihsan their fears subsided, since his head 
was shaved. They said, “These people seek the ‘Umrah, so 
there is no need to fear them.” 


The Companions conferred among themselves. That day was 
the last day in the (sacred) month of Rajab. They said to each 
other, “By Allah! If you let them pass, they will soon enter the 
Sacred Area and take refuge in it from you. If you kill them, 
you will kill them during the Sacred Month.” They at first 
hesitated and did not like to attack them. They then began 
encouraging themselves and decided to kill whomever they 
could among the disbelievers and to confiscate whatever they 
had. Hence, Waqid bin ‘Abdullah At-Tamimi shot an arrow at 
‘Amr bin Al-Hadrami and killed him. Uthman bin ‘Abdullah 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 601 


and Al-Hakam bin Kaysaén gave themselves up, while Nawfal 
bin ‘Abdullah was able to outrun them in flight. Later on, 
‘Abdullah bin Jahsh and his companions went back to Allah’s 
Messenger 3% in Al-Madinah with the caravan and the two 
prisoners. 

ibn Ishaq went on: I was told that some members of the 
family of ‘Abdullah bin Jahsh said that ‘Abdullah said to his 
companions: “Allah’s Messenger 3% will have one-fifth of what 
we have confiscated.” This occurred before Allah required one- 
fifth for His Messenger from the war booty. So, ‘Abdullah 
designated one-fifth of the caravan for Allah’s Messenger # and 
divided the rest among his companions. Ibn Ishaq also stated 
that at first, when the Sariyah came back to Allah’s Messenger 
#8, he said to them: 


eps pel 3b Jee ASF ve 


«l have not commanded you to conduct warfare during the 
Sacred Month.» 


He left the caravan and the two prisoners alone and did not 
take any share of the war booty. 

When Allah’s Messenger 3% did that, the soldiers from the 
attack were concerned and felt that they were destroyed, and 
their Muslim brethren criticized them for what they did. The 
Quraysh said that Muhammad 3% and his Companions violated 
the sanctity of the Sacred Month and shed blood, confiscated 
property and took prisoners during it. Those who refuted them 
among the Muslims who remained in Makkah replied that the 
Muslims had done that during the month of Sha‘ban (which is 
not a sacred month). Meanwhile, the Jews were pleased about 
what happened to Allah’s Messenger #%. They said, ‘ Amr bin 
Hadrami was killed by Waqid bin ‘Abdullah: ‘Amr, means the 
war has started, Hadrami means the war has come, as for 
Waqid (bin ‘Abdullah): the war has raged (using some of the 
literal meanings of these names to support their fortune- 
telling!).” But, Allah made all that turn against them. 

The people continued talking about this matter, then Allah 
revealed to His Messenger #3: 


2 z Pee . os oho Oe Boer 
wap bos BM ut & G5 AS 5a NGF hs dG MT BI ge Heap 
CS Gp KEN ENG SS ee 8 al 55 ate ag 


602 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


<They ask you concerning fighting in the Sacred Months. Say, 
“Fighting therein is a great (transgression) but a greater 
(transgression) with Allah is to prevent mankind from following 
the way of Allah, to disbelieve in Him, to prevent access to Al- 
Masjid Al-Haram (at Makkah), and to drive out its inhabitants, 
and Al-Fitnah is worse than killing .> 


This Ayah means, ‘If you had killed during the Sacred 
Month, they (disbelievers of Quraysh) have hindered you from 
the path of Allah and disbelieved in it. They also prevented 
you from entering the Sacred Mosque, and expelled you from 
it, while you are its people, 


CaS Sue SID 
€...a greater (transgression) with Allah> than killing whom you 
killed among them. Also: 


<...and Al-Fitnah is worse than killing .> 
means, trying to force the Muslims to revert from their religion 


and re-embrace Kufr after they had believed, is worse with 
Allah than killing.’ Allah said: 


Cl of pawn Ff BY; & BAS BG DD 


¢And they will never cease fighting you until they turn you 
back from your religion (Islamic Monotheism) if they can.> 


So, they will go on fighting you with unrelenting viciousness. 

Ibn Ishaq went on: When the Qur’én touched this subject 
and Allah brought relief to the Muslims instead of the sadness 
that had befallen them, Allah’s Messenger # took possession 
of the caravan and the two prisoners. The Quraysh offered to 
ransom the two prisoners, ‘Uthman bin ‘Abdullah and Hakam 
bin Kaysan. Allah’s Messenger #% said: 


tWe will not accept your ransom until our two companions 
return safely.» 


meaning Sa‘d bin Abu Waqqas and Utbah bin Ghazwan, “For 
we fear for their safety with you. If you kill them, we will kill 
your people.” Later on, Sa‘d and ‘Utbah returned safely and 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 603 


sg Yo EHRNEM Allah’s Messenger 2% 
Hg 2) ica ewe ee S55 CAg accepted the 
pace Pes 24 ies - a "2 {| Quraysh’s ransom for 
ies eer vA qbsails Pee cd bites so || their prisoners. As for 


OB sch cilitti kp icicc 7 | Al-Hakam bin 
= PMN SEIEY TESS chai Kaysan, he became 


wee 3 ike bees, dl eSSY5 Muslim and his Islam 
dees tascsiiesiss as [epenen 
SSP KoAS5 4, Se Gi sles Messenger # until he 
“wipe KG BKM EKG OSES 


was martyred during 
the incident at Bir 
fA ece iy co Rhee 089-4 ty ey terse || Ma‘tinah (when the 
AS REST GO) 0538 cole oli sot uo ll prophet — eee 
Cer di gn KE AE Bocitys seventy Companions 
fe rece cet eae ce csaeer.<, |i to Najd to teach them 
LEAS Ere SAN Urea ee SO isla, but Banu 
ZL MEN 5 Suis Ed alsyareal Sulaim killed them all 
eS tpcceih. £5 Beco tste boa ty. except two). As for 
FAVA ALL ST REF IES, ss *Uthman bin 
7 PA arc AEE 2 Shearer ces 4ze ll ‘Abdullah, he went 
Sulla ane ee 9 = aged back to Makkah and 
WS A ea SSN MCAT died there as a 
C3 ch tat UN ute Ac aie disbeliever. 
Ore zo HN al pais ys Ibn Ishaq went on: 
When ‘Abdullah bin 
Jahsh and his companions were relieved from their 
depressing thoughts after the Qur’an was revealed about this 
subject, they sought the reward of the fighters (in Allah’s way). 
They said, “O Messenger of Allah! We wish that this incident 
be considered a battle for us, so that we gain the rewards of 
the Mujdhidin.” Then, Allah revealed: 


BG 0 Sts Sts DN St Lacy Was Uys Sal Yon <t Gy 
<Verily, those who have believed, and those who hvve emigrated 
(for Allah's religion) and have striven hard in the way of Allah, 
all these hope for Allah’s mercy. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful .> 


604 Tafsir_ Ibn Kathir 


Hence, Allah has greatly elevated their hopes of gaining what 
they had wished for.!"! 


tes ot oss sf ni Kye ji pears pail _¢ SGe5 E> 


ob A hay F GS 2 Bes t8G Chg @aks enh 
Sg ih KGS St as Sh gust g LL Ay ab igs he 
(Oe 


- €219. They ask you (O Muhammad #2) concerning alcoholic 
drink and gambling. Say: “In them is a great sin, and (some) 
benefits for men, but the sin of them is greater than their 
benefit.” And they ask you what they ought to spend. Say: 
“That which is (spare) beyond your needs.” Thus Allah makes 
clear to you His Laws in order that you may give thought.> 


€220. In (to) this worldly life and in the Hereafter. And they 
ask you concerning orphans. Say: ‘The best thing is to work 
honestly in their property, and if you mix your affairs with 
theirs, then they are your brothers. And Allah knows (the one) 
who means mischief (e.g., to swallow their property) from (the 
one) who means good (e.g., to save their property). And if 
Allah had wished, He could have put you into difficulties. 
Truly, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.”’> 


The Gradual Prohibition of Khamr (Alchoholic Drink) 


Imam Ahmad recorded that Abu Maysarah said that ‘Umar 
once said, “O Allah! Give us a clear ruling regarding Al- 
Khamr!” Allah sent down the Ayah of Strat Al-Bagarah: 


ike Gy Wega B Ds 52 Heap 
<They ask you (O Muhammad 2%) concerning alcoholic drink 
and gambling. Say: “In them is a great sin...> 


‘Umar was then summoned and the Ayah was recited to 
him. Yet, he still said, “O Allah! Give us a clear ruling 
regarding Al-Khamr.” Then, this Ayah that is in Surat An- 
Nisa’ was revealed: 


[I thn Hisham 2:252-255. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 605 


eK AN; Splat (8555 ¥ iene gt Chg 


€O you who believe! Approach not As-Salah (the prayer) when 
you are in a drunken state.> (4:43) 

Then, when the prayer was called for, a person used to 
herald on behalf of Allah’s Messenger #, “No drunk person 
should attend the prayer.” ‘Umar was summoned again and the 
Ayah was recited to him. Yet, he still said, “O Allah! Give us a 
clear ruling regarding Al-Khamr.” Then, the Ayah that is in 
Surat Al-Ma’idah was revealed, ‘Umar was again summoned 
and the Ayah was recited to him. When he reached: 


ti J ie 
4So, will you not then abstain?> (5:91) 
he said, “We did abstain, we did abstain.”'! This is also the 
narration that Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasai collected 
in their books.!?!_ ‘Ali bin Al-Madini and At-Tirmidhi said that 
the chain of narrators for this Hadith is sound and authentic. 
We will mention this Hadith again along with what Imam 
Ahmad collected by Abu Hurayrah Allah’s saying in Strat Al- 
M@’idah: 
45508 SU Fe Sa yo Se, BM LCN A at > 


€Intoxicants and gambling, and Al-Ansab,®! and Al-Azlam'*! 
are an abomination of Satan’s handiwork. So avoid (strictly all) 
that (abomination) in order that you may be successful.> (5:90) 


Allah said: 
€aslls 25g shea 
<They ask you (O Muhammad #=) concerning alcoholic drinks 
and gambling .> 
As for Al-Khamr, Umar bin Khattab, the Leader of the 


faithful, used to say, “It includes all what intoxicates the 
mind.” We will also mention this statement in the explanation 


(1 Ahmad 1:531. 

1 Abu Dawud 4:79, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8 :415, An-Nasa’i 8 :287. 
(31 Altars upon which animals were sacrificed for other than Allah 
41 Arrows used for divination. 


606 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
of Strat Al-Md’idah, along with the topic of gambling.!"! 
Allah said: 


donde th Kya BD 


<Say: In them is a great sin, and (some) benefits for men.> 


As for the harm that the Khamr and gambling cause, it 
effects the religion. As for their benefit, it is material, including 
benefit for the body, digesting the food, getting rid of the 
excrements, sharpening the mind, bringing about a joyous 
sensation and financially benefiting from their sale. Also, (their 
benefit includes) earnings through gambling that one uses to 
spend on his family and on himself. Yet, these benefits are 
outweighed by the clear harm that they cause which affects 
the mind and the religion. This is why Allah said: 


hig op Et LEG? 
€...but the sin of them is greater than their benefit.> 


This Ayah was the beginning of the process of prohibiting 
Khamr, not explicity, but it only implied this meaning. So 
when this Ayah was recited to ‘Umar, he still said, “O Allah! 
Give us a clear ruling regarding Al-Khamr.” Soon after, Allah 
sent down a clear prohibition of Khamr in Stirat Al-Md@’idah: 


Boo, ‘ee oS.e we we Paes LAr a ° weer vee 45 oe ft Se Bee 
pd Creel RO ye ey BND CCAD Roi Jat Gy at it Gite 
Bebe pie, a ddpeectoeel cake Geopier ver ititbe.) bod, States e “ee 
oe Pls willy pal g aks, Oa SS Ge A Sec a Oy oa 
Rae Bod AS ere Mone ve Se oe 
€ 5 Saget al He plat 25 af 


€O you who believe! Intoxicants (all kinds of alcoholic drinks), 
and gambling, and Al-Ansab, and Al-Azlém are an 
abomination of Shaytan's handiwork. So avoid (strictly all) that 
(abomination) in order that you may be successful. Shaytin 
wants only to excite enmity and hatred between you with 
intoxicants (alcoholic drinks) and gambling, and hinder you 
from the remembrance of Allah and from Ags-Salih (the prayer). 
So, will you not then abstain? (5:90, 91)!! 


We will mention this subject, by the will of Allah, when we 


l Ahmad 2:351. 
[21 ton Abi Hatim 2 :636. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 607 


explain Surat Al-M@’idah. 

Ibn Umar, Ash-Sha‘bi, Mujahid, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas 
and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Aslam stated that the first Ayah 
revealed about Khamr was: e 


€ A> Oh Kye Rai sts Ges 
{They ask you about Khamr and gambling. Say: “In them 
there is great sin.’"} (2:219) 


Then, the Ayah in Strat An-Nisd’ was revealed {on this 
subject) and then the Ayah in Strat Al-Ma’idah which 
prohibited Khamr'! 


Spending whatever One could spare of his Money on 
Charity 


Allah said: 
CA fb hat, te ihe 
¢And they ask you what they ought to spend. Say: “That 

which is (spare) beyond your needs.’’> 

Al-Hakam said that Miqsam said that Ibn ‘Abbas said that 
this Ayah means, whatever you can spare above the needs of 
your family. This is also the opinion of Ibn Umar, Mujahid, 
‘Ata’, ‘Ikrimah, Said bin Jubayr, Muhammad bin Kab, Al- 


Hasan, Qatadah, Al-Qasim, Salim, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani and Ar- 
Rabi‘ bin Anas.!?! 


Ibn Jarir related that Abu Hurayrah said that a man said, 
“O Messenger of Allah! I have a Dinar (a currency).” The 
Prophet 2 said: 

ALE dé uae 

«Spend it you on yourself.» He said, “I have another Dinar.” He 
said: 

UAE we akaihs 

‘Spend it on your wife.» He said, “I have another Dinar.” He 
said: 

(1! At-Tabari 4:331-336. 
2] Ibn Abi Hatim 2 :656-657. 


608 Tafsir_Ibn Kathir 
AG ye gh 


«Spend it on your offspring.» He said, “I have another Dinar.” 
He said: 


¢ fe 
a ee 


‘You have better knowledge (meaning how and where to spend 
it in charity).0") 
Muslim also recorded this Hadith in his Sahih. 
Muslim recorded that Jabir said that Allah’s Messenger 3 
said to a man: 


a0 0 


CAESARS teh OES 63 LF Jab OG Gets ood 
‘Start with yourself and grant it some charity. If anything 
remains, then spend it on your family. If anything remains, 
then spend it on your relatives. If anything remains, then 
spend it like this and like that (i.e., on various charitable 
purposes) .»!?1 
A Hadith states: ; ae: 
oe eG YG dd G8 KS ty a HS Lad Jag OF OY ast ie 
US 
«O son of Adam! If you spend whatever you can spare, it 
would be better for you; but if you keep it, it would be worse 
for you. You shall not be blamed for whatever is barely 
sufficient .»!91 
Allah said: 
C5355 CA 4 WOKS (Eat oo A at at ED 


«Thus Allah makes clear to you His Aydt in order that you 
may give thought. In (to) this worldly life and in the 
Hereafter .> 


meaning, just as He stated and explained these 
commandments for you, He also explains the rest of His Aydt 


0) At-Tabari 4:340. 
[2] Muslim 2 :692. 
(3) Muslim no.1036. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 609 


regarding the commandments and His promises and warnings, 
so that you might give thought in this life and the Hereafter. 
‘Ali bin Abu Talhah said that Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “Meaning 
about the imminent demise and the brevity of this life, and the 
imminent commencement of the Hereafter and its 
continuity.”!!] 


Maintaining the Orphan’s Property 
Allah said: 

Ge LS 0 ab SS AE on SA Oy B Gal 2 Genp 

CRN Ht AS Fs justi 
And they ask you concerning orphans. Say: “The best thing is 
to work honestly in their property, and if you mix your affairs 
with theirs, then they are your brothers. And Allah knows him 
who means mischief (e.g., to swallow their property) from him 


who means good (e.g., to save their property). And if Allah 
had wished, He could have put you into difficulties.» 


Ibn Jarir reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “When the Ayat: 
4S co Bh al Se is ip 
<And come not near to the orphan’s property, except to 
improve it.> (6:152) and 


by bd 7 re, cat 2LAL 4H 7 eo eg, 
Silt OE pyle 3 abe cy CU yesh BA otek ai ap 


<Verily, those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans, 
they eat up only fire into their bellies, and they will be burnt in 
the blazing Fire!> (4:10) 


were revealed, those who took care of some orphans, separated 
their food and drink from the orphans’ food and drink. When 
some of the orphans’ food and drink remained, they would 
keep it for them until they eat it or otherwise get spoiled. This 
situation was difficult for them and they mentioned this 
subject to Allah’s Messenger 3. 


I At-Tabari 4:348. 


610 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
C855 AWE op A ay FES F BED 
¢And they ask you concerning orphans. Say: ‘The best thing is 
to work honestly in their property, and if you mix your affairs 
with theirs, then they are your brothers.> 


Hence, they joined their food and drink with the food and 
drink of the orphans.”'! This Hadith was also collected by 
Abu Dawid, An-Nasa? and Al-Hakim in his Mustadrak,!2) 
Several others said similarly about the circumstances 
surrounding the revelation of the Ayah (2:220), including 
Mujahid, ‘Ata’, Ash-Sha‘bi, Ibn Abu Layla, Qatadah and others 
among the Salaf and those after them."! 

{bn Jarir reported that ‘Aishah said, “I dislike that an 
orphan’s money be under my care, unless I mix my food with 
his food and my drink with his drink.”* 

Allah said: 

<Say : The best thing is to work honestly in their property.> 
meaning, on the one hand {i.e., this is required in any case). 
Allah then said: 


4KS5 ADE yd 
¢...and if you mix your affairs with theirs, then they are your 
brothers .> 
meaning, there is no harm if you mix your food and drink 


with their food and drink, since they are your brothers in the 
religion. This is why Allah said afterwards: 


¢And Allah knows (the one) who means mischief (e.g., to 
swallow their property) from (the one) who means good (e.g., to 
save their property) .> 


meaning, He knows those whose intent is to cause mischief or 
righteousness. He also said: 


(1) At-Tabari 4:350. 

(21 Abu Dawud 3:291, An-Nasa’i 6 :256 and Al-Hakim 2:103. 
[3] At-Tabari 4 :350-353. 

14] At-Tabari 4::355. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) z 611 


4256 iy ay RGN ae Hy 
€And if Allah had wished, He could have put you into 
difficulties. Truly, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise> 
meaning, if Allah wills, He will make this matter difficult for 
you. But, He made it easy for you, and allowed you to mix 


your affairs with the orphans’ affairs in a way that is better. 
Similarly, Allah said: 


Ci co HY aH Ic 18 Yip 
€And come not near to the orphan’s property, except to 
improve it.» (6:152) 
Allah has thus allowed spending from the orphan’s estate by 
its executor, in reasonable proportions, on the condition that 
he has the intention to compensate the orphan later on, when 


he can afford it. We will mention about it in detail in Sarat An- 
Nisa’ by Allah’s will. 


ge Serer 4 fe we tt ow wee Set wee Sy ge Ce es Sea 

Vs Sol J) SE EL BY, See SS SLi inst y5> 
Bees Pre ae gt. wee Ft meres Fy, gle ee one 

Jy SHR BSS KN SS lt oe TS bi OG Us OSL iA 
CS All WO nis 5 Holy wa Heit Jy (BA a Je 


4221. And do not marry Al-Mushrikat (idolatresses) till they 
believe (worship Allah Alone). And indeed a slave woman who 
believes is better than a (free) Mushrikah (idolatress), even 
though she pleases you. And give not (your daughters) in 
marriage to Al-Mushrikin till they believe (in Allah Alone) and 
verily, a believing servant is better than a (free) Mushrik 
(idolator), even though he pleases you. Those (Mushrikin) invite 
you to the Fire, but Allah invites (you) to Paradise and 
forgiveness by His leave, and makes His Ayat (proofs, 
evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) rlear to 
mankind that they may remember .> 


The Prohibition of marrying Mushrik Men and Women 


Allah prohibited the believers from marrying Mushrik women 
who worship idols. Although the meaning is general and 
includes every Mushrik woman from among the idol 
worshippers and the People of the Scripture, Allah excluded 


612 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 

the People of the Scripture from this ruling. Allah stated: 
¢(Lawful to you in marriage) are chaste women from those who 
were given the Scripture (Jews and Christians) before your time 
when you have given their due dowry, desiring chastity (t.e., 


taking them in legal wedlock) not committing illegal sexual 
intercourse.» (5:5) 


‘Ali bin Abu Talhah said that Ibn ‘Abbas said about what 
Allah said: 


Go. ge or oye 7 4, 
Sak & ALS lost ¥5> 


¢And do not marry Al-Mushrikat (female idolators) till they 
believe (worship Allah Alone) .> 


“Allah has excluded the women of the People of the 
Scripture.” This is also the explanation of Mujahid, Tkrimah, 
Said bin Jubayr, Makhul, Al-Hasan, Ad-Dahhak, Zayd bin 
Aslam and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas and others.'*] Some scholars said 
that the Ayah is exclusively talking about idol worshippers and 
not the People of the Scripture, and this meaning is similar to 
the first meaning we mentioned. Allah knows best. 

Abu Jafar bin Jarir (At-Tabari) said, after mentioning that 
there is Jjma‘ that marrying women from the People of the 
Scripture is allowed, "Umar disliked this practice so that the 
Muslims do not refrain from marrying Muslim women, or for 
similar reasons.” ! An authentic chain of narrators stated 
that Shaqiq said: Once Hudhayfah married a Jewish woman 
and Umar wrote to him, “Divorce her.” He wrote back, “Do 
you claim that she is not allowed for me so that I divorce 
her?” He said, “No. But, I fear that you might marry the 
whores from among them.” Ibn Jarir related that Zayd bin 
Wahb said that ‘Umar bin Khattab said, “The Muslim man 
marries the Christian woman, but the Christian man does not 
marry the Muslim woman.” This Hadith has a stronger, 
authentic chain of narrators than the previous Hadith.'*! 


1 At-Tabari 4:362. 
2] thn Abi Hatim 2 :669-671. 
(3) At-Tabari 4 :366. 

141 See At-Tabari 4 :366 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 613 


Ibn Abu Hatim!"! said that Ibn ‘Umar disliked marrying the 
women from the People of the Scripture. He relied on his own 
explanation for the Ayah: 


qk F LA ss ws > 
€And do not marry Al-Mushrikat (female idolators) till they 
believe (worship Allah Alone).> 
Al-Bukhari also reported that Ibn Umar said, “I do not know 


of a bigger Shirk than her saying that Jesus is her Lord!’"?! 
Allah said: 


C254 $5 SU os KE LL EG 
€And indeed a slave woman who believes is better than a (free) 
Mushrikah (female idolators), even though she pleases you.> 


It is recorded in the Two Sahihs that Abu Hurayrah narrated 
that the Prophet 2% said: 


sill oly ABU teas WEA Woy WL SY Hh Gah 
Bly i 


‘A woman is chosen for marriage for four reasons: her wealth, 
social status, beauty, and religion. So, marry the religious 
woman, may your hands be filled with sand (a statement of 
encouragement) .»!31 
Muslim reported this Hadith from Jabir.'*! Muslim also 
reported that Ibn ‘Amr said that Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 


cASSLEN Sich hun pe 4255 EG thin 


‘The life of this world is but a delight, and the best of the 
delights of this earthly life is the righteous wife .»'S| 


Allah then said: 
st SE GSAS ASE ab 
€And give not (your daughters) in marriage to Al-Mushrikin 


(I Ibn Abi Hatim 2:671. 

[2] Fath ALBari 9 :326. 

[3] Fath AlBari 9:35, Muslim 2:1087. 
41 Muslim 2:1087. 

(5! Muslim 2:9010. 


614 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


till they believe (in Allah Alone).> 


meaning, do not marry Mushrik men to believing women. This 
statement is similar to Allah’s statement: 


CAM AGALAD 
<They are not lawful (wives) for them, nor are they lawful 
(husbands) for thent.} (60:10) 
Next, Allah said: 
dik Jp pt 2 BoE MS, 
<...and verily, a believing servant is better than a (free) 
Mushrik (idolator), even though he pleases you .> 


This Ayah indicates that a believing man, even an 
Abyssinian servant, is better than a Mushrik man, even if he 
was a rich master. 


45 5, 85 SSD 
<Those (Al-Mushrikiin) invite you to the Fire> 
meaning, associating and mingling with the disbelievers makes 
one love this life and prefer it over the Hereafter, leading to the 
severest repercussions. Allah said: 
Koi, CASEI Sait Jy EE GD 

¢...but Allah invites (you) to Paradise and forgiveness by His 

leave> 
meaning, by His Law, commandments and prohibitions. Allah 
said: 

Cis55, AE a vite SGD 
¢...and makes His Aydt clear to mankind that they may 
remember .> 


Si EBLE edt g USE A 8 I pel ¢ leg 
Si Cail LAs SS Ld ag BA BS CAS a 

de cusi 
4222. They ask you concerning menstruation. Say: “That is an 
Adhd, therefore, keep away from women during menses and go 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqaraht (201 - 224) (Part-2) 615 


not in unto them till they are purified.” And when they have 
purified themselves, then go in unto them as Allah has ordained 
for you. Truly, Allah loves those who turn unto Him in 
repentance and loves those who purify themselves .> 


4223. Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when 
or how you will, and send (good deeds, or ask Allah to bestow 
upon you pious offspring) for your own selves beforehand. And 
fear Allah, and know that you are to meet Him (in the 
Hereafter), and give good tidings to the believers (O 
Muhammad 32) .> 


Sexual Intercourse with Menstruating Women is 
prohibited 


Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas said that the Jews used to 
avoid their menstruating women, they would not eat, or even 
mingle with them in the house. The Companions of the 
Prophet 3% asked about this matter and Allah revealed: 


Feaye ge teste Gee oe ea A sete ne os oe Ay Agee 
ton & BBV Gaal 3 THUG AS eel 2 Bie 
€They ask you concerning menstruation. Say: “That is an 


Adha, therefore, keep away from women during menses and go 
not in unto then: till they are purified .> 


Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 
Face yy toe JS Vion 
«"Do everything you wish, except having sexual intercourse.» 


When the Jews were told about the Prophet’s statement, 
they said, “What is the matter with this man? He would not 
hear of any of our practices, but would defy it.” Then, Usayd 
bin Hudayr and ‘Abbad bin Bishr came and said, “O 
Messenger of Allah! The Jews said this and that, should we 
have sex with our women (meaning, during the menstruation 
period)?” The face of Allah’s Messenger #% changed color, until 
the Companions thought that he was angry with them. They 
left. Soon after, some milk was brought to Allah’s Messenger 3 
as a gift, and he sent some of it for them to drink. They knew 
then that Allah’s Messenger # was not angry with them|!"! 


GW Ahmad 3:132. 


616 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Muslim also reported this Hadith. Allah said: 
Komedi 3 al Une 
¢...therefore, keep away from women during menses.> 
meaning, avoid the sexual organ. The Prophet 2% said: 
CEI Ved B ition 


«Do anything you wish except having sexual intercourse.»'") 


This is why most of the scholars said that it is allowed to 
fondle the wife, except for having sexual intercourse (when she 
is having her menses). Abu Dawdd reported that Tkrimah 
related to one of the Prophet’s wives that she said that 
whenever the Prophet 2% wanted to fondle (one of his wives) 
during her menses, he would cover her sexual organ with 
something.!?! 

Abu Jafar bin Jarir related that Masraq went to ‘A’ishah 
and greeted her, and ‘A’ishah greeted him in return. Masrtaq 
said, “I wish to ask you about a matter, but I am shy.” She 
replied, “I am your mother and you are my son.” He said, 
“What can the man enjoy of his wife when she is having her 
menses?” She said, “Everything except her sexual organ.” 
This is also the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and 
Tkrimah. 

One is allowed to sleep next to his wife and to eat with her 
(when she is having her menses). ‘A’ishah said, “Allah’s 
Messenger 3 used to ask me to wash his hair while I was 
having the menses. He would lay on my lap and read the 
Qur’an while I was having the period.”*) It is also reported in 
the Sahih that ‘A'ishah said, “While having the menses, I used 
to eat from a piece of meat and give it to the Prophet # who 
would eat from the same place | ate from. I used to have sips of 
a drink and would then give the cup to the Prophet # who 
would place his mouth where I placed my mouth.”!*! 

It is also reported in the Two Sahihs that Maymunah bint 


(1 Muslim 1:246. 
(21 Abu Dawud 1:286. 
'3) At-Tabari 4 :378. 
I4] Fath Al-Bari 1:479. 
IS] Muslim 1:245. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 617 


Al-Harith Al-Hilaliyah said, “Whenever the Prophet #3 wanted 
to fondle any of his wives during the periods (menses), he used 
to ask her to wear an Izdr (a sheet covering the lower-half of the 
body).” These are the wordings collected by Al-Bukhari,!"! 
Similar was reported from ‘A’ishah.!7! In addition, Imam 
Ahmad, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn MAajah reported that 
‘Abdullah bin Sa‘d Al-Ansari asked Allah’s Messenger 3%, “What 
am I allowed of my wife while she is having her menses?” He 
said, “What is above the Izdr (a sheet covering the lower-half of 
the body).”*! Hence, Allah’s statement: 


ici & BEE Td 


«...and go not in unto them till they are purified.» explains His 
statement: 


inns 3 Cai Usb 
¢...therefore, keep away from women during menses .> 
Allah prohibited having sexual intercourse with the wife 


during menstruation, indicating that sexual intercourse is 
allowed otherwise. 


Allah’s statement: 
C5 BA Ls pe CASS SAS Bp 


¢And when they have purified themselves, then go in unto 
them as Allah has ordained for you .> 


indicates that men should have sexual intercourse with their 
wives after they take a bath. The scholars agree that the 
woman is obliged to take a bath, or to perform Tayammum 
with sand, if she is unable to use water, before she is allowed 
to have sexual intercourse with her husband, after the 
monthly period ends. Ibn ‘Abbas said: 


dois & 
“till they are purified> means from blood, and, 
01 Fath ALBari 1:483,Muslim 1:243. 


[21 Fath ALBari 1:480,Muslim 1 :242. 


13) Ahmad 4:342, Abu Dawud 1:145,Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 1:415, Ibn 
Majah 1:213. 


618 Tafsir _ Ibn Kathir 
{i 


¢And when they have purified themselves> means with water.” This 
is also the Tafsir of Mujahid, Ikrimah, Al-Hasan, Mugatil bin 
Hayyan and Al-Layth bin Sa‘d and others.!'! 
Anal Sex is prohibited 
Allah said: 
50 Sits Ep 
¢...as Allah has ordained for you.> 


this refers to Al-Farj (the vagina), as Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid and 
other scholars have stated.!?! Therefore, anal sex is prohibited, 
as we will further emphasize afterwards, Allah willing. Abu 
Razin, Ikrimah and Ad-Dahhak and others said that: 


di SASS Casi 
€...then go in unto them as Allah has ordained for you.> 


means when they are pure, and not during the menses.!! 
Allah said afterwards: 


init Ld 3) 
<Truly, Allah loves those who turn unto Him in repentance> 
from the sin even if it was repeated, 
cuit! L45> 
<and loves those who purify themselves .> 


meaning, those who purify themselves from the impurity and 
the filth that include having sexual intercourse with the wife 
during the menses and anal sex. 


The Reason behind revealing Allah’s Statement: “Your 
Wives are a Tilth for You.” 


Allah said: 


"l Ibn Abi Hatim 2:682,683. 
2] Ibn Abi Hatim 2:684. 
3) Ibn Abi Hatim 2 :684 685. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 619 


€Your wives are a tilth for you,> 


Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “Meaning the place of pregnancy. 
{Allah then said:] 


vf] 


Zee Si Kis Up 
¢...s0 go to your tilth, when or how you will,> 

meaning, wherever you wish from the front or from behind, as 
long as sex takes place in one valve (the female sexual organ), 
as the authentic Hadiths have indicated. 

For instance, Al-Bukhari recorded that Ibn Al-Munkadir said 
that he heard Jabir say that the Jews used to claim that if 
one has sex with his wife from behind {in the vagina) the 


offspring would become cross-eyed. Then, this Ayah was 
revealed: 


iz Ske Ub Ki by BG 
<Your wives nd a tilth for ue so go to your tilth, when or 
how you will ,>'! 
Muslim and Abu Dawud also reported this Hadith.'*1 
Ibn Abu Hatim said that Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir 
narrated that Jabir bin. ‘Abdullah told him that the Jews 
claimed to the Muslims that if one has sex with their wife from 


behind (in the vagina) their offspring will become cross-eyed. 
Allah revealed afterwards: 


dis 5 KG Ub Ay SG 
4Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or 
how you will,> 
Ibn Jurayj (one of the reporters of the Hadith) said that 
Allah’s Messenger #8 said: 
cyl g BY oS 151 5,0, hee 
«From the pore or from behind, as long as that occurs in the 
Farj (vagina) .»!*) 


(1) At-Tabari 4 :397. 

[2] Fath ALBari 4:397. 

(3) Muslim 2:1058, Abu Dawud 2:618. 
4] ton Abi Hatim 2 :693. 


62000 Tafsir Ton Kathir 
Imam Ahmad recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The Ayah, 
455 35 Sp 
<Your wives are a tilth for you> 
was revealed about some people from the Ansar who came to 


the Prophet # and asked him (about having sex with the wife 
from behind). He said to them: 
crpal 3 SWE 1 JE IS ole Gate 
‘Have sex with her as you like as long as that occurs in the 
vagina 0!" 

Imam Ahmad recorded that ‘Abdullah bin Sabit said: I went 
to Hafsah bint ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr and said, “I wish 
to ask you about something, but I am shy.” She said, “Do not 
be shy, O my nephew.” He said, “About having sex from 
behind with women.” She said, “Umm Salamah told me that 
the Ansar used to refrain from having sex from behind (in the 
vagina). The Jews claimed that those who have sex with their 
women from behind would have offspring with crossed-eyes. 
When the Muhdjirtin came to Al-Madinah, they married Ansar 
women and had sex with them from behind. One of these 
women would not obey her husband and said, ‘You will not do 
that until I go to Allah’s Messenger #% (and ask him about this 
matter).’ She went to Umm Salamah and told her the story. 
Umm Salamah said, ‘Wait until Allah’s Messenger 3 comes.’ 
When Allah’s Messenger 3% came, the Ansari woman was shy to 
ask him about this matter, so she left. Umm Salamah told 
Allah’s Messenger #% the story and he said: 


Lai ea 
«Summon the Ansari woman .»” 
She was summoned and he recited this Ayah to her: 


Se. te bee ib ei Be fare. 
dts Skis Uh Ki Bx HD 


€Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or 
how you will.> He added: 


tials Gis 


(1) Ahmad 1:268. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 621 
«Only in one valve (the vagina) .0"""! 

This Hadith was also collected by At-Tirmidhi who said, 
«“ Hasan.”'?1 

An-Nas@’i reported that Ka‘b bin ‘Alqamah said that Abu An- 
Nadr said that he asked Nafi‘, “The people are repeating the 
statement that you relate from Ibn ‘Umar that he allowed sex 
with women in their rear (anus).” He said, “They have said a 
lie about me. But let me tell you what really happened. Ibn 
‘Umar was once reciting the Qur’an while I was with him and 
he reached the Ayah: 


ee iat BG Bee bare, 
ts al KE yb SS Be SID 


<Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or 
how you will,> 


He then said, ‘O Nafi‘! Do you know the story behind this 
Ayah?’ I said, ‘No.’ He said, ‘We, the people of Quraysh, used 
to have sexual intercourse with our wives from the back (in 
the vagina). When we migrated to Al-Madinah and married 
some Ansari women, we wanted to do the same with them. 
They disliked it and made a big issue out of it. The Ansari 
women had followed the practice of the Jews who have sex 
with their women while they lay on their sides. Then, Allah 
revealed: 


Gis KE Uk A bs SED 
<Your wives are a tilth for you, so go to your tilth, when or 
how you will,>”*! 
This has an authentic chain of narrators. 
Imém Ahmad reported that Khuzaymah bin Thabit Al- 
Khatami narrated that Allah’s Messenger #% said: 
cfaslndl 3 cn 136 ¥ - be - Sally an is 


‘Allah does not shy from the truth - he said it thrice-, do not 
have anal sex with women.v'*) 


1 Ahmad 6:305. 

2) Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8 :322. 

13] An-Nasa’i in Al-Kubra 5:315. 
I) Ahmad 5:215. 


O22 i yt on = Tafsir lon Kathir 


This Hadith was collected by An-Nasai and Ibn Majah.!! 
Abu ‘sa At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa’7 reported that Ibn ‘Abbas 
narrated that Allak’s Messenger #& said: 


«23 3 Foal gh E523 ht ogy an ES 


tAllah does not look at a man who had anal sex with another 
man or a woman.»!?! 


At-Tirmidhi said, “Hasan Gharib.” This is also the narration 
that Ibn Hibban collected in his Sahih, while Ibn Hazm stated 
that this is an authentic Hadith. 

In addition, Imam Ahmad reported that ‘Ali bin Talaq said, 
“Allah’s Messenger 3% forbade anal sex with women, for Allah 
does not shy away from truth.”°] Abu sa At-Tirmidhi also 
reported this Hadith and said, “Hasan”."“| 

Abu Muhammad ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdur-Rahman Darimi 
reported in his Musnad that Said bin Yasar Abu Hubab said: | 
said to Ibn ‘Umar, “What do you say about having sex with 
women in the rear?” He said, “What does it mean?” I said, 
“Anal sex.” He said, “Does a Muslim do that?”5! This Hadith 
has an authentic chain of narrators and is an explicit rejection 
of anal sex from Ibn ‘Umar. 

Abu Bakr bin Ziyad Naysabdri reported that Isma‘il bin Ruh 
said that he asked Malik bin Anas, “What do you say about 
having sex with women in the anus?” He said, “You are not an 
Arab? Does sex occur but in the place of pregnancy? Do it 
only in the Farj (vagina).” I said, “O Abu ‘Abdullah! They say 
that you allow that practice.” He said, “They utter a lie about 
me, they lie about me.” This is Malik’s firm stance on this 
subject. It is also the view of Said bin Musayyib, Abu 
Salamah, ‘Ikrimah, Tawis, ‘Ata , Said bin Jubayr, ‘Urwah bin 
Az-Zubayr, Mujahid bir. Jabr, Al-Hasan and other scholars of 
the Salaf (the Companions and the following two generations 


(1 An-Nasai in Al-Kubré 5:316, Ibn Majah 1-619. 

21 Tuhfat AlLAhwadhi 4:329, An-Nasa’ in Al-Kubra 5:320, Sahih Ibn 
Hibban 6 :202. 

3] thn Hajr mentioned it in Atraf AlL-Musnad 4 :384, but it is not in the 
published version . 

(4 Tyhfat ALAhwadhi 4 :274. 

(S) Ad-Darimi 1:277 no. 1143. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (201 - 224) (Part-2) 623 


after them}. They all, along with the majority of the scholars, 
harshly rebuked the practice of anal sex and many of them 
called this practice a Kufr. 
Allah said: 
€KAY (555 
¢...and send for your own selves beforehand .> 

meaning, by performing the acts of worship while refraining 
from whatever Allah has prohibited for you. This is why Allah 
said afterwards: 


water oe 


C5 LAN (as Lp 
¢And fear Allah, and know that you are to meet Him (in the 
Hereafter),> 
meaning, He will hold you accountable for all of your deeds, 


de pil 35 
¢...and give good tidings to the believers (O Muhammad 23).> 


meaning, those who obey what Allah has commanded and 
refrain from what He has prohibited. Ibn Jarir reported that 
‘Ata’ said, or related it to Ibn ‘Abbas, 


CEA 485 
€...and send for your own selves beforehand .> 


means, mention Allah’s Name, by saying, ‘Bismillah’, before 
having sexual intercourse.”'! Al-Bukhari also reported that 
Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 


iy Sth ee Sai cat OU RE gb OF sist by Sas Of phe 

anSgh Susi 355 oF ius 3 Wy gg Ae Oy Op 5 Sue 
af anyone of you on having sexual relations with his wife said : 
‘In the Name of Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan and also 
protect what you bestow upon us (i.e., the coming offspring) 


from Satan,’ and if it is destined that they should have a child 
then, Satan will never be able to hari him .0!?! 


I! At-Tabari 4:417. 
[2] Fath Al-Bari 9 :136. 


624 


BEN im) ait 
25, Seis Socks sais 
tere ve 


: BA se, 
SAF So SIRG A GD Ais) he HG ae 
eee ee ese Fen 


pee iw) menage ailSb bob ore 


SOS ASO si saga 
ern e Voth, il 
insides 9 SIL AG AEBS 
ess 5 Lay Oya g 


xa 5 Mls Sesh sles 
ZONCale 


567 SLi 8 f 
Sebo Lassies cS Fea Sioa 
MEAT TV OLE Aah 
Saale gle ae AlSyte GaN Tales Jf ail 


Seer mar Ft a Ge 


be 


Jer BS Zsose 


DING A592 SH Seo 


Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Sets ae 
Via YS} 
ester ther ¢ be 
ives WS A fee 
2 ptte 4 oe ot ohe 
te AS onl ne Ws 


2 


o a Sa Y mh 


ioe it 


Sit 5S; Ket a 
i i Kb ences 
ins ae 


4224. And make not 
Allah’s (Name) an ex- 
cuse in your oaths 
against doing good and 
acting piously, and 
making peace among 
mankind. And Allah is 
All-Hearer, All-Knower 
(i.e., do not swear 


much and if you have 
sworn against doing 
something good then 


: ate ae ef 44 07% 2ss 
CS Ae Sead CGAL ED 5 fuss ioe 
4ute oe Re 2S 7C 7CO ae 


eee 

PERE CTT ATC ALAC RATTIAR ACEC ive an expiation for the 

Oink a Weghes ailagde Cis slgieeg Sail and to aS 
4225. Allah will not call you to account for that which is 
unintentional in your oaths, but He will call you to account for that 
which your hearts have earned. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most- 
Forbearing .> 


The Prohibition of swearing to abandon a Good Deed 


Allah commands, You should not implement your vows in 
Allah’s Name to refrain from pious acts and severing the 
relations with the relatives, if you swear to abandon such 
causes.’ Allah said in another Ayah: 


SSS Sal hE I eh Laat ol yp 
fos ? ee* Beorte 


C55 al 3b oS See Vi iit, (55 


¢And let not those among you who are blessed with graces and 


rae 7 


LS b Sept 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 625 


wealth swear not to give (any sort of help) to their kinsmen, Al- 
Masakin (the poor), and those who left their homes for Allah's 
cause. Let them pardon and forgive. Do you not love that Allah 
should forgive you?> (24:22) 
Continuity in a sinful vow is more sinful than breaking it by 
expiation. Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


tele Mol 55551 
«By Allah! It is more sinful to Allah that one of you 
implements his vow regarding (severing the relations with) his 
relatives than (breaking his promise and) paying the Kaffarah!! 
that Allah has required in such cases.» 


This is how Muslim reported this Hadith and also Imam 
Ahmad.!! 

‘Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that what 
Allah said: 


Ges iad Si 
¢And make not Allah's (Name) an excuse in your oaths» 


means, “Do not vow to refrain from doing good works. (If you 
make such vow then) break it, pay the Kaffarah and do the 
good work.”°! This was also said by Masraq, Ash-Shabi, 
Ibrahim An-Nakhai, Mujahid, Tawis, Sa‘iid bin Jubayr, ‘Ata’, 
Ikrimah, Makhwtl, Az-Zuhri, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Muaatil bin 
Hayyan, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani and 
As-Suddi."4) 

Suporting this view, which is the majority view, is what is 
reported in the Two Sahihs that Abu Musa Al-Ash‘ari 
narrated that Allah’s Messenger 2 said: 

silt CA te GE GE S56 eed the CAST lat at Sy ty sl 
vigillts se 5 
«By Allah! Allah willing, I will not vow to do a thing and then 


13] Expiation, refer to 5:89. 

(21 Fath Al-Bari 12:441, Muslim 3:1276, Ahmad 2:317. 
(31 At-Tabari 4:422. 

(41 Ibn Abi Hatim 2:700-702. 


626 _ Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


see a better act, but I would do what is better and break my 
vow.0'l Muslim reported that Abu Hurayrah said that 
Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 


SP GAN Jaa cateed So AR ee IF ESE SID geal Ue Gale 
vet 


rca 


«Whoever makes a vow and then finds what is better than his 
vow (should break his vow,) pay the Kaffarah and perform the 
better deed .»!?) 


The Laghw (Unintentional) Vows 
Allah said: 


€Allah will not call you to account for that which is 
unintentional in your oaths,> 


This Ayah means, ‘Allah does not punish or hold you 
accountable for the Laghw (unintentional) vows that you 
make.’ The Laghw vows are unintentional and are just like the 
habitual statements that the tongue repeats, without really 
intending them. For instance, it is reported in the Two Sahihs 
that Abu Hurayrah narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


it SY Me cSt oot as 3 SS Gs gan 


‘Whoever swore and (unintentionally) mentioned Al-Lat and 
Al-’Uzza (two idols) in his vow, should then say, ‘There is no 
deity worthy of worship except Allah’ .1!*l 


The Messenger 3% said this statement to some new Muslims 
whose tongues were, before Islam, used to vowing by their idol 
Al-Lat. Therefore, the Prophet #4 ordered them to intentionally 
recite the slogan of Ikhids, just as they mentioned these words 
by mistake, so that it (the word of Ikhlds) may eradicate the 
word (of Shirk). This is why Allah said: 


E5495 ELS & Sig S55> 
(1) Fath ALBari 11:525, Muslim 3 :1268 


[2] Muslim 3:1272. 
(31 path ALBari 11:545, Muslim 2:1268. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) __ 627 


¢...but He will call you to account for that which your hearts 
have earned.} and in another Ayah: 


CN LE Gp 
¢...for your deliberate oaths> (5:89) 


Abu Dawud reported under Chapter: The Laghw Vows’ that 
‘Ata’ said that ‘A’ishah said that Allah’s Messenger # said: 


ts YG ails Ered GB JEN PT SB oeodt g jhln 


‘The Laghw in the vows includes what the man says in his 
house, such as, ‘No, by Allah,’ and, ‘Yes, by Allah’ 2"! 


fbn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The Laghw 
vow includes vowing while angry.”! 

He also reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The Laghw vow 
includes vowing to prohibit what Allah has allowed, and this 
type does not require a Kaffarah (expiation).” Similar was said 
by Sa‘id bin Jubayr.!*! 

In addition, Abu Dawud related under Chapter: ‘Vowing 
while Angry’ that Sa‘id bin Musayyib said that two Ansari 
brothers both received inheritance and one of them asked that 
the inheritance be divided. His brother said, “If you ask me 
about dividing the inheritance again, then all of what I have 
will be spent on the Ka‘bah’s door.” ‘Umar said to him, “The 
Ka‘bah does not need your money. So break your vow, pay the 
Kaffarah and come to terms with your brother. I heard Allah’s 
Messenger 3# saying: 


VCRs pe ds 85 eS eS eet 6 EG Ge Bt We 
pT 


7 


«Do not make a vow against yourself, nor to disobey the Lord, cut 
the relations of the womb or dispose of what you do not own .0"*4) 


Allah said: 
Ris LS G Si S55 


(4 Abu Dawud 3:572. 
(7) Ibn Abi Hatim 2:716. 
(SI Ibn Abi Hatim 2:715. 
41 Abu Dawud 3:581. 


628. | Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


¢...but He will call you to account for that which your hearts 
have earned ,> 


Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid and several others said that this Ayah 
mezins swearing about a matter while knowing that he is lying. 
Mujahid and others said this Ayah is similar to what Allah said: 


Brin st t- . ‘> 
(ESN Bb Lk 5p 


¢.. but He will punish you for your deliberate oaths.» (5:89) 
Allah said (2:225 above): 


de SS bp 
¢And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most-Forbearing .» 


meaning, He is Oft-Forgiving to His servants and Most 
Forbearing with them. 


as ty tes She at op A of A 5 ad & GR GD 
4226. Those who take an oath not to have sexual relation with 
their wives must wait for four months, then if they return, 
verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful .> 


4227. And if they decide upon divorce, then Allah is All- 
Hearer, All-Knower .> 


The I12’ and its Rulings 


Ila’ is a type of vow where a man swears not to sleep with 
his wife for a certain period, whether less or more than four 
montis. If the vow of Ila’ was for less than four months, the 
man has to wait for the vow’s period to end and then is 
allowed to have sexual intercourse with his wife. She has to be 
patient and she cannot ask her husband, in this case, to end 
his vcw before the end of its term. It is reported in the Two 
Sahihs that ‘Alishah said that Allah’s Messenger #% swore he 
would stay away from with his wives for a month. He then 
came down after twenty-nine days saying: 


ty hes eS peal 


‘The (lunar) month is twenty-nine days.»\"! 


(I Fath ALBari 8:380, Muslim 2:1113. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 629 


Similar was narrated by Umar bin Al-Khattaéb and reported 
in the Two Sahihs.'"! If the period of fia’ is for more than four 
months, the wife is allowed in this case to ask her husband, 
upon the end of the four months, to end the fia’ and have 
sexual relations with her. Otherwise, he should divorce her, by 
being forced to do so by the authorities if necessary, so that 
the wife is not harmed. Allah said: 


44K ce SSB Sal> 

<Those who take an oath not to have sexual relations with their 

wives> 
meaning, swear not to have sexual relations with the wife. 
This Ayah indicates that the fla’ involves the wife and not a 
slave-women, as the majority of the scholars have agreed, 

<5 tah ta 
¢...must wait for four months,> 


meaning, the husband waits for four months from the time of 
the vow and then ends the Id’ (if the vow was for four or more 
months) and is required to either return to his wife or divorce 
her. This is why Allah said next: 


436 upd 
¢...then if they return,> 


meaning, to a normal relationship, having sexual intercourse 
with the wife. This is the Tafsir of Ibn ‘Abbas, Masriq, Ash- 
Shai, Said bin Jubayr and Ibn Jarir.!2! 


dfs Sib SBD 
€...verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.> 


with any shortcomings that occurred in the rights of the wife 
because of the vow of ila’. 
Allah said: 


BAW tise > 
€And if they decide upon divorce, 


0! Fath ALBari 4:143, Muslim 2:1110. 
2) At-Tabari 4:466 ,467. 


630 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


indicating that divorce does not occur by merely passing the 
four month mark (during the fla}. Malik reported from Nafi‘ 
that ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar said, “If the man swears to fla’ from 
his wife, then divorce does not occur automatically even after 
the four months have passed. When he stops at the four 
months mark, he should either divorce or return.” Al- 
Bukhari also reported this Hadith.'?| Ibn Jarir reported that 
Suhayl bin Abu Salih said that his father said, “I asked twelve 
Companions about the man who does /la’ with his wife. They 
all stated that he does not have to do anything until the four 
months have passed and then has to either retain or divorce 
her.”3! Ad-Daraqutni also reported this from Suhay).'*! 

It is also reported from Umar, Uthman, ‘Ali, Abu Ad-Darda’, 
‘A’ishah, Ibn ‘Umar and Ibn ‘Abbas. This is also the opinion of 
Safid bin Musayyib, ‘Umar bin ‘Abdul-‘Aziz, Mujahid, Tawas, 
Muhammad bin Ka’‘b and Al-Qasim. 

eter prt 


ted og ate ate ye ree, ty A je tk ten tA ‘ cane 
ied a i Bu SG I A 4 5 $33 OE Stl ae CLS > 
fo ae aes & er PAE 0 eae 5 gee S78 sat pre © Soe tr Sf £5 oe gf 
all J By Oey GAOT 8 GS gs bs, SIs BAT HG al Sk Fo 
tN Be, a se bL.. 2 2 “oye Se geht fo fe 
din Se fas iG 4a50 Gple Ses caval, le 


* 


4228. And divorced women shall wait (as regards their 
marriage) for three menstrual periods, and it is not lawful for 
them to conceal what Allah has created in their wombs, if they 
believe in Allah and the Last Day. And their husbands have the 
better right to take them back in that period, if they wish for 
reconciliation. And they (women) have rights (over their 
husbands as regards living expenses) similar (to those of their 
husbands) over them (as regards obedience and respect) to what 
is reasonable, but men have a degree (of responsibility) over 
them. And Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.> 


The ‘Iddah (Waiting Period) of the Divorced Woman 


This Ayah contains a command from Allah that the divorced 
woman, whose marriage was consummated and who still has 


1] 4LMuwatta 2 :556. 
(2) Fath Al-Bari 9 :335. 
{3} At-Tabari 4:493. 

(4) Ad-Dardqutni 4:61. 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 631 


menstruation periods, should wait for three (menstrual) 
periods (Quru) after the divorce and then remarry if she 
wishes. 


The Meaning of Al-Quru’ 


Ibn Jarir related that ‘Algamah said: We were with ‘Umar bin 
Al-Khattab when a woman came and said, “My husband 
divorced me one or two periods ago. He then came back to me 
while I had prepared my water [for taking a bath], took off my 
clothes and closed my door.” ‘Umar asked ‘Abdullah bin 
Mas‘ud, “What do you think?” He said, “I think that she is still 
his wife, as long as she is not allowed to resume praying (i.e., 
until the third period ends before he takes her back).” ‘Umar 
said, “This is my opinion too.”'! This is also the opinion of 
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, Umar, Uthman, ‘Ali, Abu Ad-Darda’, 
‘Ubadah bin As-Samit, Anas bin Malik, Ibn Mas‘Gd, Mu‘adh, 
Ubayy bin Ka‘b, Abu Musa Al-Ash‘ari and Ibn ‘Abbas. 
Furthermore, this is the opinion of Sa‘id bin Musayyib, 
‘Alqamah, Aswad, Ibrahim, Mujahid, ‘Ata’, Tawis, Sa‘id bin 
Jubayr, Ikrimah, Muhammad bin Sirin, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, 
Ash-Shai, Ar-Rabi‘, Muqatil bin Hayyan, As-Suddi, Makhal, 
Ad-Dahhak and ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani. They all stated that the 
Quru’ is the menstruation period. What testifies to this is the 
Hadith that Abu Dawud and An-Nasa7 reported that Fatimah 
bint Abu Hubaiysh said that Allah’s Messenger 3 said to her: 


eabisal pel SN est 


‘Do not pray aur your Agra’ (pl. for Quru’, the 
menstruation period) .»!? 


If this Hadith was authentic, it would have been a clear 
proof that the Quru’ is the menstruation period. However, one 
of the narrators of this Hadith, Al-Mundhir, is an unknown 
person (in Hadith terminology), as Abu Hatim has stated, 
although Ibn Hibban has mentioned Al-Mundhir in his book 
Ath-Thigat. 


(1) At-Tabari 4:502. 
[2] Abu Dawud 1:191, An-Nas@7 6:211. 


632 Tafsir Ibn_ Kathir 


A Woman’s Statement about Menses and Purity is to be 
accepted 


Allah said: 
digit a i Su 325 Sh Gp 


¢...and it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah has 
created in their wombs,> 


meaning, of pregnancy or menstruation periods. This is the 
Tafsir of Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn ‘Umar, Mujahid, Ash-Sha‘bi, Al- 
Hakam bin ‘Utaybah, Ar-Rabi' bin Anas, Ad-Dahhak and 
others, !!! 

Allah then said: 


<...if they believe in Allah and the Last Day.> 


This Ayah warns women against hiding the truth (if they 
were pregnant or on their menses), indicating that they are the 
authority in such matters as they alone know such facts 
about themselves. Since verifying such matters is difficult, 
Allah left this decision with them. Yet, women were warned 
not to hide the truth in case they wish to end the ‘Iddah 
sooner, or later, according to their desires. Women were thus 
commanded to say the truth (if they were pregnant or on their 
menses), no more and no less. 


The Husband has the Right to take back his Divorced 
Wife during the Iddah (Waiting Period) 
Allah said: 
ey TN 84 BS o Sas, HA eR 
And their husbands have the better right to take them back in 
that period, if they wish for reconciliation .> 


Hence, the husband who divorces his wife can take her 
back, providing she is still in her Sddah (time spent before a 
divorced woman or a widow can remarry) and that his aim, by 
taking her back, is righteous and for the purpose of bringing 
things back to normal. However, this ruling applies where the 


") Ibn Abi Hatim 2:744,745. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) _ 633 


husband is eligible to take his divorced wife back. We should 
mention that (when this Ayah 2:228 was revealed), the ruling 
that made the divorce thrice and specified when the husband 
is ineligible to take his divorced wife back, had not been 
revealed yet. Previously, the man used to divorce his wife and 
then take her back even if he had divorced her a hundred 
separate times. Thereafter, Allah revealed the following Ayah 
(2:229) that made the divorce only thrice. So there was now a 
reversible divorce and an irreversible final divorce. 


The Rights the Spouses have ove: Each Other 
Allah said: 
vil, bie oil J Shay 
<And they (women) have rights (over their husbands as regards 
living expenses) similar (to those of their husbands) over them 
(as regards obedience and respect) to what is reasonable ,> 
This Ayah indicates that the wife has certain rights on her 
husband, just as he has certain rights on her, and each is 


obliged to give the other spouse his due rights. Muslim 
reported that Jabir said that Allah’s Messenger # said: 


ik, Shea's Aline a Bul GUT Se Gt 8 a Suh 


Wurdle (85-55 GB) Ws oe oe 
‘Fear Allah regarding your women, for you have taken them by 
Allah's covenant and were allowed to enjoy with them sexually 
by Allah’s Words. You have the right on them that they do not 
allow anyone you dislike to sit on your mat. If they do that, 
then discipline them leniently. They have the right to be spent 
on and to be bought clothes in what is reasonable .0'"| 
Bahz bin Hakim said that Mu‘aéwiyah bin Haydah Al- 
Qushayri related that his grandfather said, “O Messenger of 
Allah! What is the right the wife of one of us has?” The 
Prophet # said: 
ENG teh Spi VG SSI yA, ak 1) Yank! Sh 


(1) Muslim 2 :886. 


634 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


wool 3 WAR YG 


"To feed her when you eat, buy her clothes when you buy for 
yourself and to refrain from striking her on the ae cursing 
her or staying away from her except in the house.»!") 


Waki‘ related that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “I like to take care of my 
appearance for my wife just as I like for her to take care of her. 
appearance for me. This is because Allah says: 

dial, Sle wi JE odd 

¢And they (women) have rights similar (to those of their 

husbands) over them to what is reasonable.>” This statement 

is reported by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abu Hatim.!?! 


The Virtue Men have over Women 


Allah said: 
8... gfe fae 
iey3 Gyple Seas > 


<but men have a degree (of responsibility) over them .> 


This Ayah indicates that men are in a more advantageous 
position than women physically as well as in their mannerism, 
status, obedience (of women to them), spending, taking care of 
the affairs and in general, in this life and in the Hereafter. 
Allah said (in another Ayah): 


& ah he a FH TES et & os dD 
ig ee 
cea 
<Men are the protectors and maintainers of women, because 


Allah has made one of them to excel the other, and because they 
spend (to support them) from their means.> (4:34) 


Allah’s statement: 
US bis GD 
¢And Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise 


means, He is Mighty in His punishment of those who disobey 


1 Abu Dawud 2 :606. 
[21 At-Tabari 4:532, Ibn Abi Hatim 2:750. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 635 


and defy His commands. He is Wise in what He commands, 
destines and legislates. 


tK Wek J peed J4 Ws gop | fea Sh ule 
<a sau: Ra eae Lar ae ads 


me Syehai ab Asi al 432 LE 5 ics SE Al 398 Bb Ay S28t id 
of ae Style act SE Gl of Fe ws os EA Ge DE HE le og 


ore Ss ya x 4 al 39h a5 a5 She arr ol ras 
€229. The divorce is twice, after that either you retain her on 
reasonable terms or release her with kindness. And it is not 
lawful for you (men) to take back (from your wives) any of what 
you gave them (the Mahr, bridal-money given by the husband 
to his wife at the time of marriage), except when both parties 
fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by 
Allah (e.g., to deal with each other on a fair basis). Then if you 
fear that they would not be able to keep the limits ordained by 
Allah, then there is no sin on either of them if she gives back 
(the Mahr or a part of it). These are the limits ordained by 
Allah, so do not transgress them. And whoever transgresses the 
limits ordained by Allah, then such are the wrongdoers.> 


€230. And if he has divorced her (the third time), then she is 
not lawful unto him thereafter until she has married another 
husband. Then, if the other husband divorces her, it is no sin 
on both of them that they reunite, provided they feel that they 
can keep the limits ordained by Allah. These are the limits of 
Allah, which He makes plain for the people who have 
knowledge .> 


Divorce is Thrice 


This honorable Ayah abrogated the previous practice in the 
beginning of Islam, when the man had the right to take back 
his divorced wife even if he had divorced her a hundred times, 
as long as she was still in her TIddah (wait-:a:;, period). This 
situation was harmful for the wife, and this is wny Allah made 
the divorce thrice, where the husband is allowed to take back 
his wife after the first and the second divorce (as long as she 
is still in her Iddah). The divorce becomes irrevocable after the 


636 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
third divorce, as Allah said: 
Sk eS FI orks SIE 0% SAID 
<The divorce is twice, after that, either you retain her on 
reasonable terms or release her with kindness .> 


In his Sunan, Abu Dawud reported in Chapter: “Taking the 
Wife back after the third (Divorce) is an abrogated practice," 
that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on the Ayah: 


2 CK Ly pte che ye ote Ty Be ee tad tee 8s etree A Hs vaste, 
intl 3 i SEG B25 SH Se Gh 5 BE SA a Lai 


¢And divorced women shall wait (as regards their marriage) for 
three menstrual periods, and it is not lawful for them to conceal 
what Allah has created in their wombs,> (2:228) 


The man used to have the right to take back his wife even if 
he had divorced her thrice. Allah abrogated this and said: 


4S Sibi> 
<The divorce is twice.>""! 

This Hadith was also collected by An-Nasai.'7) Ibn Abu 
Hatim reported that Urwah said that a man said to his wife, “I 
will neither divorce you nor take you back.” She said, “How?” 
He said, “I will divorce you and when your term of ‘Iddah 


nears its end, I will take you back.” She went to Allah’s 
Messenger 3% and told him what happened, and Allah revealed: 


456% SABi> 
<The divorce is twice.>'! 


Ibn Jarir (At-Tabari) also reported this Hadith in his 
Tafsir.|4) 
Allah said: 


G55 GA ots Sey 


<...after that, either you retain her on reasonable terms or 
release her with kindness .> 


(1 Abu Dawud 2:644. 
[2] An-Nasa’i 6:212. 

3] Ibn Abi Hatim 2:754. 
(41 At-Tabari 4:539. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 637 


meaning, If you divorce her once or twice, you have the choice 
to take her back, as long as she is still in her ‘Iddah, 
intending to be kind to her and to mend differences. 
Otherwise, await the end of her term of ‘Iddah, when the 
divorce becomes final, and let her go her own way in peace, 
without committing any harm or injustice against her.’ ‘Ali bin 
Abu Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “When the man 
divorces his wife twice, let him fear Allah, regarding the third 
time. He should either keep her with him and treat her with 
kindness, or let her go her own way with kindness, without 
infringing upon any of her rights.”!"! 


Taking back the Mahr (Dowry) 
Allah said: 
40k Besse CH WE I eed Je s5> 

€And it is not lawful for you (men) to take back (from your 

wives) any of (the dowry) what you gave them,> 
meaning, you are not allowed to bother or pressure your wives 
to end this situation by giving you back the Mahr and any 
gifts that you have given them (in return for divorce). 
Similarly, Allah said: 

¢...and you should not treat them with harshness, that you 


may take away part of what you have given them, unless they 
commit open illegal sexual intercourse .> (4:19) 


However, if the wife willingly gives back anything with a good 
heart, then Allah said regarding this situation: 


CGE oh I CE ES ah of SI Gh op 
<...but if they, of their own good pleasure, remit any part of it 
to you, take it, and enjoy it without fear of any harm.> (4:4) 


Allowing Khul‘ and the Return of the Mahr in that Case 


When the spouses have irreconcilable differences wherein the 
wife ignores the rights of the husband, dislikes him and 


(1) At-Tabari 4:543. 


638 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


becomes unable to live with him any longer, she is allowed to 
free herself (from married life) by giving him back what he had 
given her (in gifts and Mahr. There is no sin on her in this 
case nor on him if he accepts such offer. This is why Allah 
said: 


TP shee 


pA Mt ug WE IY ct Bee TB ME Se J > 

€i4 Se GE Ce SG AtGk Ge ize 
¢And it is not lawful for you (men) to take back (from your 
wives) any of what you gave them, except when both parties 
fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by 
Allah (e.g., to deal with each other on a fair basis). Then if you 


fear that they would not be able to keep the limits ordained by 
Allah, then there is no sin on either of them if she gives back.> 


Sometimes, the woman has no valid reason and she still 
asks for her marriage to be ended. In this case, Ibn Jarir 
reported that Thawban said that Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


Bah to; ale ad be og Ob ej Lik aio th 


€Any woman who asks her husband for divorce without 
justification, then the scent of Paradise will be forbidden for 
her 0!) 


At-Tirmidhi recorded this Hadith and stated that it is 
Hasan.'?! 

Ibn Jarir said that the Ayah (2:229) was revealed about 
Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas and his wife Habibah bint 
‘Abdullah bin Ubayy bin Salal.'! In his Muwatta’, Imam Malik 
reported that Habibah bint Sahl Al-Ansariyah was married to 
Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas and that Allah’s Messenger i# 
once went to the Fajr (Dawn) prayer and found Habibah bint 
Sahl by his door in the dark. Allah’s Messenger # said, “Who is 
this?” She said, “I am Habibah bint Sahl, O Messenger of 
Allah!” He said, “What is the matter?” She said, “I and Thabit 
bin Qays”, meaning, (she can no longer be with) her husband. 
When her husband Thabit bin Qays came, Allah’s Messenger 3% 


(1) At-Tabari 4 :569. 
[21 Tuhfat ALAhwadhi 4 :367. 
[31 at-Tabari 4:556. 


Sarah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 639 
said to him: 
e855 Sf in old G 2585 ype EE ES oda 
«This is Habibah bint Sahl, she said what Allah has permitted 
her to say.) 
Habibah also said, “O Messenger of Allah! I still have 
everything he gave me.” Allah’s Messenger 2 said: 
Ogre hbo 
‘Take it from her.» So, he took it from her and she remained 
in her family’s house.”!'! 
This was reported by Ahmad, Abu Dawud and An-Nasai.!! 
Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the wife of 
Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas came to the Prophet 3 and 
said, “O Messenger of Allah! I do not criticize his religion or 
mannerism. But I hate committing Kufr in Islam (by ignoring 
his rights on her).” Allah’s Messenger 2 said: 
eis ale 3 37%p 


«Will you give him back his garden?» 
She said, “Yes.” Allah’s Messenger 2 said: 


real ¢ uit : SE cii a0 
«Take back the garden and divorce her once.»!*! 
An-Nasai also recorded it.'*! 


The ‘Iddah (Waiting Period) for the Khul‘ 


At-Tirmidhi reported that Rubayi‘ bint Mu‘awwidh bin ‘Afra’ 
got a Khul‘ during the time of Allah’s Messenger #% and the 
Prophet #% ordered her to wait for one menstruation period for 
qddah.!*! 


Transgressing the set limits of Allah is an Injustice 
Allah said: 


(11 4LMuwatta 2 :564. 

[2] Ahmad 6:433, Abu Dawud 2 :667, An-Nasai 6:169. 
3] Fath ALBari 9 :306. 

(4) An-Nasa’i 6:169. 

1S) Tunfat Al-Ahwadhi 4 :363. 


640 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Spt oh BGG Bt 3 SS ry VES Et 5932 ap 
4These are the limits ordained by Allah, so do not transgress 


them. And whoever transgresses the limits ordained by Allah, 
then such are the wrongdoers .> 


This means that the laws that Allah has legislated are His 
set limits, so do ‘not transgress them. An authentic Hadith 
states: 


MG ps Soy Bhai WG Jah Go, Kd 96 5,52 Ss a Sp 

vigz IIl5 6 ot 2 Y. oi ig th be Choy USS 
‘Allah has set some limits, so do not transgress them; and 
commanded some commands, so do not ignore them; and made 
some things unlawful, so do not commit them. He has also left 


some imatters (without rulings) as a mercy with you, not 
because He has forgotten them, so do not ask about them!" 


Pronouncing Three Divorces at the same Time is 
Unlawful 

The last Ayah we mentioned was used as evidence to prove 
that it is not allowed to pronounce three divorces at one time. 
What further proves this ruling is that Mahmud bin Labid has 
stated - as An-Nas@’i recorded - that Allah’s Messenger 2% was 
told about a man who pronounced three divorces on Itis wife at 
one time, so the Prophet # stood up while angry and said: 


005 abl 35 ly bt Ges, Cabh 
‘The Book of Allah is being made the subject of jest while I am 
still amongst you?» 


A man then stood up and said, “Should I kill that man, O 
Messenger of Allah?”?! 


The Wife cannot be taken back after the Third Divorce 
Allah said: 
C8 05 SE EUG HE Ke ob> 
(1 Ad-Daraqutni 4 :298. 
(21 An-Nasai 6:142. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 641 


¢And if he has divorced her (the third time), then she is not 
lawful for him thereafter until she has married another 
husband .> 


This Ayah indicates that if the man divorces his wife for the 
third time after he divorced her twice, then she will no longer 
be allowed for marriage to him. Allah said: 


Bree ad s Ge 
€o78 035 cs > 
¢...until she has married another husband .> 


meaning, until she legally marries another man. For instance, 
if she has sexual intercourse with any man, even her master 
(if she was a servant), she would still be ineligible for marriage 
for her ex-husband (who divorced her thrice), because 
whomever she had sexual relations with was not her legal 
husband. If she marries a man without consummating the 
marriage, she will not be eligible for her ex-husband. Muslim 
reported that ‘Aishah said that Allah’s Messenger 2% was 
asked about a woman who marries a man who thereafter 
divorces her (thrice). She then marries another man and he 
divorces her before he has sexual relations with her, would she 
be allowed for her first husband? Allah’s Messenger 3% said: 
ghee Sys SS 
«No, until he enjoys her ‘Usaylah (sexual relation) .0!"! 
Al-Bukhari also reported this Hadith.'?! _ 

Imam Ahmad recorded that ‘A’ishah said, “The wife of 
Rifa‘ah Al-Qurazi came while I and Abu Bakr were with the 
Prophet # and she said, 1 was Rifa‘ah’s wife, but he divorced 
me and it was an irrevocable divorce. Then I married ‘Abdur- 
Rahman bin Az-Zubayr, but his sexual organ is minute like a 
string.’ She then took a small string of her garment (to 
resemble how small his sexual organ was). Khalid bin Sa‘id bin 
Al-‘As, who was next to the door and was not yet allowed in, 
said, ‘O Abu Bakr! Why do you not forbid this (woman) from 
what she is revealing frankly before the Prophet?’ The Prophet 
3% merely smiled. Then, Allah’s Messenger 3% asked her: 


I! Muslim 2:1057. 
(2) Fath ALBari 9 :284. 


642 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
if 24 fe - 4c fe OG fet Pann a ie 
THEA! 355505 sane (Sy oe | EG, OM ce ON a F lito 


«Do you want to remarry Rifa‘ah? You cannot unless you 
experience his ‘Usaylah and he experiences your ‘Usaylah (i.e., 
had a complete sexual relation with your present husband) 0"! 


Al-Bukhari, Muslim, and An-Nasai also recorded this 
Hadith."! Muslim’s wording is “Rifa‘ah divorced his wife for 
the third and final time." 

The word ‘Usaylah mentioned in the Hadith means sexual 
intercourse. Imam Ahmad and An-Nasai reported that ‘A’ishah 
said that Allah’s Messenger # said: 


Lendl aha | Yio 


«Usaylah is sexual intercourse .v'*! 


The Curse on the Participants of Tahlil/Haladlah 


The reason for the woman (who was divorced thrice) to 
marry another man must be that the man desires her and has 
the intention of having an extended married life with her. 
These are the legal goals and aims behind marriage. If the 
reason behind the second marriage was to make the woman 
eligible for her ex-husband again, then this is the Tahili that 
the Hadiths have cursed and criticized. In addition, when the 
reason behind this marriage {if it was Tahlil) is announced in 
the contract, it would make the contract invalid according to 
the majority of the scholars. 

Imam Ahmad reported that ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘td said, 
“Allah’s Messenger #% cursed the one who does Tahlil, the one 
in whose favor it is done, those who eat Riba (usury) and those 
who feed it (pay the usury).”“! At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasai 
reported this Hadith!®) and At-Tirmidhi said, “This Hadith is 
Hasan.” He said, “This is what is acted upon according to 
people of knowledge among the Companions, among whom are 


14] Ahmad 6:34 

[2] Fath Al-Bari 10:518, Muslim 2:1057, An-Nasail 6 :146. 

[3] Ahmad 6:62. 

[4] Ahmad 1:448. 

IS] Ahmad 1:448, Tuhfat AlLAhwadhi 4 :268, An-Nasa7 6:149. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 643 


‘Umar, ‘Uthman and Ibn ‘Umar. It was also the saying of the 
scholars of Figh among the Tabi‘in (second generation of Islam). 
And it has been reported from ‘Ali, Ibn Mas‘td and Ibn ‘Abbas”. 

In his Mustadrak, Al-Hakim reported that Nafi‘ said: “A man 
came to Ibn ‘Umar and asked him about a man who divorced 
his wife three times. Then, his brother married her to make 
Tahlil for his brother, without the brother knowing this fact. 
He then asked, “Is she allowed for the first (husband)?” He 
said, “No, unless it is a marriage that involves desire. We used 
to consider this an act of adultery during the time of Allah’s 
Messenger 3.” Al-Hakim said, “This Hadith has a Sahih chain 
although they (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) did not record it.”!"! The 
wording of this Hadith indicates that the ruling came from the 
Prophet x. Abu Bakr bin Abu Shaybah, Al-Jawzjani, Harb Al- 
Kirmani and Abu Bakr Al-Athram said that Qabisah bin Jabir 
said that ‘Umar said, “If the participants to Tahlil are brought 
to me, I will have them stoned.’”!?! 


When does a Woman who was divorced Three Times 
become Eligible for Her First Husband 
Allah said: 
4d o> 


¢And if he has divorced her» meaning, the second husband after 
he had complete sexual relations with her, 


Cia AE eet Sip 
dit is no sin on both of them that they reunitey meaning, the wife 
and her first husband, 
Cl ok cg A pd 
provided they feel that they can keep the limits ordained by Allah.> 
meaning, they live together honorably. Mujahid said, “If they 


are convinced that the aim behind their murriage is 
honorable.”*! Next, Allah said: 


Saal 4532 ss > 


Ul Al-Hakim 2:199. 
21 tbn Abi Shaybah 4 :294. 
13) At-Tabari 4 :598. 


644 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


These are the limits 
of Allah,> His 
commandments and 
legislation, © 


4 * 2 i Yared 4 Gente . ssdene , 
Naya ASG eel ai a palbliys 
b tein ere ge acs 


ei tte 2k, ger oS doe 
ROTO LN eae On TES TIT 


opt eae, Se Pra 7 a od os en Oe eet ne ane 

B55 ia al ease Gas GI 5 ACS Ab is ays beets 0 

IG USI Kae JAG Kile MEL He makes plain> 
ae, Seth tetr ete Cat see, € oo. 4 Sher 90, 

Aen ANH atl BiG Khe 45555 Say 


Sra EDA adel ee eG SHES 
ANT KEI ARK 
SSSA Sie IT GSN Blips 
SLAs el aL eals 
SCN es LC arises 
ATE SAA IAG GLfias 


4 oe %O7 ese, a a Taare TaTS 
ite ge CEG AE PG AT asHlss 
3 4 re ae ey te tite me Bey eted 444 
Gk yee ESE STs aeadales 5 
se ae Dele sor 


Ge sciaraOI esa 


for the people who have 
knowledge .> 


Saal GG acai Ait 15> 
Bee SF gis Ces 


a 
- 
wh te he Rese 
e 


Ca al eit Gants 5 acd 
SA Gs Kile AN ccs S56 
4231. And when 
you have divorced women and they have fulfilled the term of 
their prescribed period, either take them back on a reasonable 
basis or set them free on a reasonable basis. But do not take 
them back to hurt them, and whoever does that, then he has 
wronged himself. And treat not the verses (Laws) of Allah in 
jest, but remember Allah’s favors on you (i.e., Islam), and that 
which He has sent down to you of the Book (i.e., the Qur'an) 
and Al-Hikmah (the Prophet's Sunnah ~ legal ways — Islamic 
jurisprudence) whereby He instructs you. And fear Allah, and 

know that Allah is All-Aware of everything>. 


Being Kind to the Divorced Wife 


This is a command from Allah to men that when one of 
them divorces his wife with a reversible divorce, he should 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 645 


treat her kindly. So when her term of ‘Iddah (waiting period) 
nears its end, he either takes her back in a way that is better, 
including having witnesses that he has taken her back, and he 
lives with her with kindness. Or, he should release her after 
her ‘Iddah finishes and then kindly asks her to depart from 
his house, without disputing, fighting with her or using foul 
words. Allah then said: 
IE Oe AKA Y5> 
<But do not take them back to hurt them,> 

Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, Masraq, Al-Hasan, Qataddah, Ad- 
Dahhak, Ar-Rabi‘ and Muqatil bin Hayyan said that a man 
used to divorce his wife, and when her Jddah came near its 
end, he would take her back to harm her and to stop her from 
marrying someone else. He then divorced her and she would 
begin her Jddah and when her ‘Iddah term neared its end, he 
would take her back again, so that the term of Sddah would 
be prolonged for her. After that, Allah prohibited this 
practice.) Allah has also threatened those who indulge in 
such practices, when He said; 


<...and whoever does that, then he has wronged himself.> 
meaning, by defying Allah’s commandments. 
Allah then said: 
4S a ok Gai 5p 
¢And treat not the verses (Laws) of Allah in a jest,> 
Ibn Jarir said that Abu Musa (Al-Ash‘ari) narrated that 
Allah’s Messenger #% once became angry at the Ash‘ari tribe. 
Abu Musa went to him and said, “O Messenger of Allah! Are 
you angry with the Ash‘ariyyin?” The Prophet 3% said: 
Sly Alb Gobet Geib hs 5 bk; Wb LS Sich de 
«One of you says, ‘I divorced her’ -then says- ‘I took her back!" 
This is not the appropriate way Muslims conduct divorce. 


() ton Abi Hatim 2:772-774. 


646 Tafsir_Ibn_ Kathir 


Divorce the woman when she has fulfilled the term of the 
prescribed period .0!") 


Masruq said that the Ayah refers to the man who harms his 
wife by divorcing her and then taking her back, -so that the 
‘Iddah term is prolonged for her.'?!_ Al-Hasan, Qatadah, ‘Ata’ 
Al-Khurasani, Ar-Rabi‘ and Mugatil bin Hayyan said, “He is 
the man who divorces his wife and says, ‘1 was joking.’ Or he 
frees a servant or gets married and says, 1 was only joking.’ 
Allah revealed: 

E055 al ose lads Sop 
€And treat not the verses (Laws) of Allah in a jest,>'*) 


Then such men were made to bear the consequences of their 
actions. 
Allah then said: 


4G i Sa USSG) 
<...but remember Allah's favors on you,> 


meaning, by His sending His Messenger 2% with the right 
guidance and clear signs to you: 


4iXclb SSH Ke Hep 
¢...and that which He has sent down to you of the Book (i.e., the 
Qur’an) and Al-Hikmah> meaning the Sunnah, 
iy Kisd 
<...whereby He instructs you .> 


meaning, commands you, forbids you and threatens you for 
transgressing His prohibitions. Allah said: 


€ai (G6) 
¢And fear Allah> 
meaning, concerning what you perform and what you avoid, 
dese oh Ky HN GhewD 
¢and know that Allah is All-Aware of everything .> 


Ol At-Tabari 5:14. 
[2] at-Tabari 5:8. 
{31 Ibn Abi Hatim 2:775,776. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 647 


none of your secret or public affairs ever escapes His 
knowledge, and He will treat you accordingly. 


Als oie 5 a SET 58 S80 3G Bk Ke os oy HES 

<r Ss ¥ 
4232. And when you have divorced women and they have 
fulfilled the term of their prescribed period, do not prevent them 
from marrying their (former) husbands, if they mutually agree 
on reasonable basis. This (instruction) is an admonition for him 
among you who believes in Allah and the Last Day. That is 


more virtuous and purer for you. Allah knows and you know 
not .> 


The Wali (Guardian) of the Divorced Woman should not 
prevent Her from going back to Her Husband 


‘Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “This 
Ayah was revealed about the man who divorces his wife once 
or twice and her ‘Iddah finishes. He later thinks about taking 
her back in marriage and the woman also wishes that, yet, her 
family prevents her from remarrying him. Hence, Allah 
prohibited her family from preventing her.” Masraq, Ibrahim 
An-Nakhai, Az-Zuhri and Ad-Dahhak stated that this is the 
reason behind revealing the Ayah (2:232).'"! These statements 
clearly conform to the apparent meaning of the Ayah. 


There is no Marriage without a Wali (for the Woman) 


The Ayah (2:232) also indicates that the woman is not 
permitted to give herself in marriage. Rather, she requires a 
Wali (guardian such as her father, brother, adult son, and so 
forth) to give her away in marriage, as Ibn Jarir and At- 
Tirmidhi have stated when they mentioned this Ayah. Also, a 
Hadith states that: 


CIF DN ge SN Op gee SS oF Vy ih id O53 ve 


Clas 


(1 At-Tabari 5 :22,23. 


648 Tafsir Ibn. Kathir 


‘The woman does not give another woman away for marriage 
and the woman does not give herself away in marriage, for only 
the adulteress gives herself away for marriage .»!") 


Another Hadith states: 


the Giles wey hy, VW CG Ve 


«No marriage is valid except with the pacicpation of a mature 
Wali and two trustworthy witnesses .0!? 


The Reason behind revealing the Ayah (2:232) 


It was reported that this Ayah was revealed about Ma‘qil bin 
Yasar Al-Muzani and his sister. Al-Bukhari reported in his 
Sahih, when he mentioned the Tafsir of this Ayah (2:232), that 
the husband of the sister of Ma‘qil bin Yasar divorced her. He 
waited until her ‘ddah finished and then asked to remarry 
her, but Ma‘gil refused. Then, this Ayah wds sent down: 


| Ged ass Jes SD 


<...do not prevent them - from marrying their (former) 
husbands.>'*! 


Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Abu Hatim, Ibn Jarir and Ibn 
Marduwyah and Al-Bayhaqi reported this Hadith from Al- 
Hasan from Ma‘qil bin Yasar.'*! At-Tirmidhi rendered this 
Hadith authentic and in his narration, Ma‘qil bin Yasar gave 
his sister in marriage for a Muslim man during the time of 
Allah’s Messenger 3%. She remained with him for a while and 
he divorced her once and did not take her back until her ‘Iddah 
finished. They then wanted to get back with each other and he 
came to ask her for marriage. Ma‘qil said to him, “O ungrateful 
one! I honored you and married her to you but you divorced 
her. By Allah! She will never be returned to you.” But Allah 
knew his need for his wife and her need for her husband and 
He revealed: 


") thn Majah 1 :606. 

[2] Majma‘ Az-Zawdé’id 4 :286 

3! Fath ALBari 8:40. 

41 Abu Dawud 2:569, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8:325, Ibn Abi Hatim 
2:778, At-Tabari 5:17-19, Al-Bayhaqi 7 :104. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 649 


or 


45k SG acti ‘Ail 55> 


<And when you have divorced women and they have fulfilled 
the term of their prescribed period,> 


until He said: 


2 


RLy5E YF 5215 > 
<...and you know not.> 
When Ma‘qil heard the Ayah, he said, “I hear and obey my 
Lord.” He then summoned the man and said, “I will honor you 
and let you remarry (my sister).”!'! Ibn Marduwyah added 
(that Ma‘qil said), “And will pay (the expiation) for breaking my 
vow.” 
Allah said: 
425 356 Hh 8 Ke © hy LES SD 
€This (instruction) is an admonition for him among you who 
believes in Allah and the Last Day.> 
meaning, prohibiting you from preventing the women from 
marrying their ex-husbands, if they both agree to it, 
qs SF ad 
among you> O people, 
425i 2316 il Gd 
who believes in Allah and the Last Day.> 


meaning, believes in Allah’s commandments and fears His 
warnings and the torment in the Hereafter. Allah said: _ 


i 5B Kp 
<That is more virtuous and purer for you.> 
meaning, obeying Allah’s Law by returning the women to their 
ex-husbands, and abandoning your displeasure, is purer and 
cleaner for your hearts, 


4555 Sp 


UW Tyhfat ALAhwadhi 8; 324. 
[2] Al-Bayhaqi 7 :104. 


650 : Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


€Allah knows> the benefits you gain from what He commands 
and what He forbids. 


4p ¥ Gp 
¢and you know not> the benefits in what you do or what you 
refrain from doing. 

Gi A add Jes UHI BI sol ga GLE Ss GAG Gy bagh > 
sod AM 5 aly as SS ey all Ses 
SASS Oe ct BS Ce OG 2 Ta Oil of “OS BE ot 
€233. The mothers should suckle their children for two whole 
years, (that is) for those (parents) who desire to complete the 
term of suckling, but the father of the child shall bear the cost of 
the mother’s food and clothing on a reasonable basis. No person 
shall have a burden laid on him greater than he can bear. No 
mother shall be treated unfairly on account of her child, nor 
father on account of his child. And on the (father's) heir is 
incumbent the like of that (which was incumbent on the father). 
If they both decide on weaning, by mutual consent, and after 
due consultation, there is no sin on them. And if you decide on 
a foster suckling-mother for your children, there is no sin on 
you, provided you pay (the mother) what you agreed (to give 
her) on a reasonable basis. And fear Allah and know that Allah 
is All-Seer of what you do.> 


The Suckling Period is only Two Years 


This is a direction from Allah to the mothers to suckle their 
infants through the complete term of suckling, which is two 
years. Hence, suckling after two years is not included in this 
address. Allah said: 


CESK ES sh Gad 
¢...who desire to complete the term of suckling,> 
Therefore, the suckling that establishes Tahrim (prohibition, 


i.e., one cannot marry his mother or sister from suckling) is 
what occurs before the two years end. If the infant is suckled 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 651 


only after two years of age, then no Tahrim will be established. 
At-Tirmidhi under Chapter: ‘Suckling establishes Tahrim 
within the first two years,’ reported that Umm Salamah 
narrated that Allah’s Messenger 2% said: 


«Suckling establishes Tahrim if it is on the breast and before 
Fitam (before weaning, i.e., before the end of the first two 
years) .»!"l 
At-Tirmidhi said, "This Hadith is Hasan Sahih. The majority 
of the people of knowledge among the Companions of Allah’s 
Messenger #% and others acted upon this, that is that suckling 
establishes Tahrim (prohibition in marriage) before the end of 
the two years and that whatever occurs after that does not 
establish Tahrim". At-Tirmidhi is alone in recording this Hadith 
and the narrators in its chain meet the criteria of the 
Sahihayn. The Prophet’s statement: 


(5331 3 SK G Vp 


«On the breast» refers to the organ of suckling before the two 
years. Imam Ahmad reported a Hadith in which Al-Bara’ bin 
‘Azib narrated, “When Ibrahim, the Prophet’s son, died, the 
Prophet 34 said: 

est 3g Koy Joy cdl Bg SU gt Sp 


«My son has died on the breast and he has someone to suckle 
him in Paradise .v') 


Furthermore, Ad-Daraqutni related that Ibn ‘Abbas said that 
Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 


eS55Ut 3 SW GV lS5 yy ae 

«Suckling establishes Tahrim only within the (first) two 

years 0! 

Imam Malik reported this Hadith from Thawr bin Zayd who 
narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas related it to the Prophet #:.'*! Ad- 
I") Tyuhfat A-Ahwadhi 4:313. 

(2) meat At-Tafsir 1:126. 
(3) Ad-Daraqutni 4 :174. 
41 ALMuwatta’ 2 :602. 


652 : Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Darawardi reported this Hadith from Thawr who narrated it 
from ‘Ikrimah who narrated it from Ibn ‘Abbas. In this 
narration, which is more authentic, he added: 


tecpls ils oslgsh 383 SE wip 


‘Whatever occurs after the two years is not considered .» 


Suckling beyond the Two Years 


It is reported in the Sahih that ‘Aishah thought that if a 
woman gives her milk to an older person (meaning beyond the 
age of two years) then this will establish Tahrim.') This is also 
the opinion of ‘Ata’ bin Abu Rabah and Layth bin Sa‘d. Hence, 
‘Aishah thought that it is permissible to suckle the man 
whom the woman needs to be allowed in her house. She used 
as evidence the Hadith of Salim, the freed slave of Abu 
Hudhayfah,. where the Prophet 3 ordered Abu Hudhayfah’s 
wife to give some of her milk to Salim, although he was a man, 
and ever since then, he used to enter her house freely. 
However, the rest of the Prophet’s wives did not agree with this 
opinion and thought that this was only a special case.?! This is 
also the opinion of the majority of the scholars. 


Suckling for Monetary Compensation 
Allah said: 
« Ball SG Seb db adill 5d . 
€...but the father of the child shall bear the cost of the mother's 
focd and clothing on a reasonable basis .> 


meaning, the father of the baby is obliged to provide for ‘the 
expenses of the mother and to buy her clothes, in reasonable 
amounts usually used by similar women in that area, without 
extravagance or stinginess. The father spends within his 
means in this case. Allah said in another Ayah: 


SCE ae 9 ae et Bb oe 3b Ss oH gs GED 
€ 3 6 i oi fon er & 
<Let the rich man spend according to his means; and the man 


0 Muslim 2:1077. 
[21 Abu Dawud 2:549,550. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2 653 


whose resources are restricted, let him spend according to what 
Allah has given him. Allah puts no burden on any person 
beyond what He has given him. Allah will grant after hardship, 
ease.» (65:7) 
Ad-Dahhaék commented, “If the husband divorces his wife, 
with whom he had a child, and she suckles that child, he is 


required to provide for the mother’s expenses and clothes 
within reason.”"! 


No Darar (Harm) or Dirar (Revenge) 
Allah said: 
46S, a5 TS I> 
No mother shall be treated unfairly on account of her child,> 

meaning, the mother should not decline to rear her child to 
harm its father. The mother does not have the right to refrain 
from suckling the child after giving birth, unless she suckles 
him/her the milk that is necessary for his/her survival. Later 
on, she is allowed to give up custody of the child as long as 
she does not do that intending to harm the father. In addition, 


the father is not allowed to take the child from his mother to 
harm the mother. This is why Allah said: 


dy A3S% I> 
¢...nor father on account of his child.> 


meaning, by taking the child from its mother intending to 
harm the mother. This is the Tafsir of Mujahid, Qatadah, Ad- 
Dahhak, Az-Zuhri, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri and Ibn Zayd, and 
others on this Ayah.'?! 

Allah then said: 


EAS Je Sart 65> 
€And on the (father’s) heir is incumbent the like of that (which 
was incumbent on the father).> 
meaning, by refraining from harming the relative (of the father, 
i.e., his infant), as Mujahid, Ash-Sha‘bi and Ad-Dahhak stated. 


"I at-Tabari 5:39. 
[2] At-Tabari 5:49,50. 


654 Tafsir _lbn Kathir 


It was also reported that (the Ayah requires) the inheritor (of 
the father) to spend on the mother of the child, just as the 
father was spending, and to preserve her rights and refrain 
from harming her, according to the Tafsir of the majority of 
the scholars. We should state that Ibn Jarir has explained this 
subject in detail in his Tafsir and that he also stated that 
suckling the child after the second year might harm the child’s 
body and mind. Sufyan Ath-Thawri narrated that ‘Alqamah 
asked a woman who was suckling her child after the second 
year ended, not to do that.!"! 


Fitadm (weaning) occurs by Mutual Consent 
Allah said: 
EOE EL BH NES CS oo Via 0 38> 
¢if they both decide on weaning, by mutual consent, and after 
due consultation, there is no sin on them. 


This Ayah indicates that if the father and the mother decide 
on the Fitam (weaning) before the two years (of suckling) end, 
and for a benefit that they duly discuss and agree upon, then 
there is no sin in this case. So, the Ayah indicates that one 
parent is not allowed to make this kind of decision without 
duly consulting the other parent, as stated by Ath-Thawri. The 
method of mutual consultation protects the child’s interests. It 
is also a mercy from Allah to His servants, for He has 
legislated the best method for parents to rear their children, 
and His legislation guides and directs the parents and the 
children to success. Similarly, Allah said in Surat At-Talagq 
(chapter 65 in the Qur’an): 

A od EKG BRO ob Sie XS ish Bil 3G Ki Bat opp 
<Then if they give suck to the children for you, give them their 
due payment, and let each of you accept the advice of the other 
in a just way. But if you make difficulties for one another, then 
some other woman may give suck for him (the father of the 
child) .}» (65:6) 


Allah then said: 


(1) At-Tabari 5:36. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 655 


. 
z Pa : 
west reer BAcrss etl be te 


if eK J AA Bp 


- 44 
: At as ca ae ol _ Pee igh, de 
Ege arnt dardosresderGdls | i puke iy Ke Ce 


& 
14 SRE were ee 


Kok cess SLA I Pte a) ah £5 


“tre 


DC odvon es BF a, gore z er ais tare 

Ap Osha lejaily yas Legealg tates ¢And if you decide on a 
Teeter. oe A 90 « of Ae 2107 4 7 die . ee 

NS > sey om eelig ele Cle (r} || foster suckling-mother 


a 


Pee an 2446 4. od.2% 4,8 our children, there 
SOS SNK the Boel for your childr 


aa4 


is no sin on you, pro- 


Ce EIST Sade oY 5 vided you pay (the 


cere 1 22th wr Gar e“ire: ose 
MALES SE ae uv Ya Pye 


Alpatsr sonable basis .> 


(plete Kola laity 


4, 


ye 
aL! 
” 

rad Sa poved or ees Ave 


see 2 Eodes gb, 
ne hei Ses Aa pial ly Nays 


mother) what you agreed 
(to give her) on a rea- 


a ea eee ae G42 cee meaning, if the 
aalbol ele a Z-é2986213) || mother and the father 
‘ Au both agree that the 

father assumes 


asters Sis, porte eae SAKE ode nee ve : 
Specs Copel ep tapadifes25 8 || custody of the child 


od evrgegegs Ave < °c os DAek7 ted due to 
25S by bo B circumstance that 


ord on & 


veg 9Sewd or Cw, eeeen ae 
S582 7 Ala ols CRN 3 aie eo oll 


a 


gays) << ass VE pe ass 9 Hh compels her or allows 
5 ft him to do so, then 
there is no sin in this 


G oc dred (242, %derr7 ernter.cai- Hlcase. Hence, the 
Se 0. aN So Sta ISY5 , 


mother is allowed to 


give up the child and 
the father is allowed to assume custody of the child. The 
father should kindly give the mother her expenses for the 
previous period (during which she reared and suckled the 
child), and he should seek other women to suckle his child for 


monetary compensation. Thereafter, Allah said: 
it (56> 
¢And fear Allah> meaning, in all of your affairs, 
is OA Si Spe 


And know that Allah is All-Seer of what you do.> meaning, 
none of your affairs or speech escapes His perfect Watch. 


a 


SaeeE vege yaar Ue gee i eo rs star week o bhee of yokes 2 age 
Sele! Sab tp pes pt iat Seth Gish CS O55 Kee SE Saitg> 


656 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


dime Ab aS Gab Syd St yg Hh ha Ke ae 
4234. And those of you who die and leave wives behind them, 
‘they (the wives) shall wait (as regards their marriage) for four: 
months and ten days, then when they have fulfilled their term, 
there is no sin on you if they (the wives) dispose of themselves 
ina (just and) honorable manner (i.e., they can marry). And 
Allah is well-acquainted with what you do.> 


The Iddah (Waiting Period) of the Widow 


This Ayah contains a command from Allah to the wives 
whose husbands die, that they should observe a period of 
‘Iddah of four months and ten nights, including the cases 
where the marriage was consummated or otherwise, according 
to the consensus (of the scholars). 

The proof that this ruling includes the case where the 
marriage was not consummated is included in the general 
meaning of the Ayah. In a narration recorded by Imam Ahmad 
and the compilers of the Sunan, which At-Tirmidhi graded 
Sahih, Ibn Mas‘ad was asked about a man who married a 
woman, but he died before consummating the marriage. He 
also did not appoint a Mahr (dowry) for her. They kept asking 
Ibn Mas‘id about this subject until he said, “I shall give you 
my own opinion, and if it is correct then it is from Allah, while 
if it is wrong it is because of my error and because of (the evil 
efforts of) Satan. In this case, Allah and His Messenger are 
innocent of my opinion. She has her full Mahr.” In another 
narration, Ibn Mas‘tid said, “She has a similar Mahr to that of 
the women of her status, without stinginess or extravagance.” 
He then continued, “She has to spend the ‘Iddah and has a 
right to the inheritance.” Ma‘qil bin Yasar Ashja‘i then stood 
up and said, “I heard Allaéh’s Messenger 3 issue a similar 
judgment for the benefit of Barwa‘ bint Washiq.” ‘Abdullah bin 
Mas‘id became very delighted upon hearing this statement. In 
another narration, several men from Ashja‘ (tribe) stood up and 
said, “We testify that Allah’s Messenger # issued a similar 
ruling for the benefit of Barwa‘ bint Washiq.”!"! 


"'l Ahmad 3:480, Abu Dawud 2:588, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 4 :299, An- 
Nasa7 6:198, Ibn Majah 1 :609. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 657 


As for the case of the widow whose husband dies while she 
is pregnant, her term of Iddah ends when she gives birth, 
even if it occurs an instant (after her nuppand dies). This 
ruling is taken from Allah’s Sintement 


Coe BS A AS oA 2ahp 


€And for those who are pregnant, their ‘Iddah is until they lay: 
down their burden .> (65:4) 


There is also a Hadith from Subay‘ah Al-Aslamiyah in the Two 
Sahihs, through various chains of narration. Her husband, Sa‘d 
bin Khawlah, died while she was pregnant and she gave birth 
only a few nights after his death. When she finished her Nifds 
(postnatal periad), she beautified herself for those who. might 
seek to engage her (for marriage). Then, Abu Sandabil bin Ba‘kak 
came to her and said, “Why do I see you beautified yourself, do 
you wish to marry? By Allah! You will not marry until the -four 
months and ten nights have passed.” Subay‘ah said, “When he 
said that to me, I collected my garments when night fell and 
went to Allah’s Messenger #* and. asked him about this matter. 
He said that my ‘Iddah had finished when I gave birth and 
allowed me to get married if I wished.”?! 


The Wisdom behind legislating the Iddah 


Said bin Musayyib and Abu Al-‘Aliyah stated that the 
wisdom behind making the ‘Jddah of the widow four months 
and ten nights is that the womb might contain a fetus. When 
the woman waits for this period, it will become evident if she 
is pregnant. Similarly, there is a Hadith in the Two Sahihs 
narrated by Ibn Mas‘id stating: 


ols Se he OS (adhe Gs Sa3l th obs wa fot pSusl GLE bp 

coy N ad GS tui chy Las NS fe at 0,5 
«(The creation of) a human being is put together i in the womb of 
his mother in forty days in the form. of a seed, and next he 
becomes a clot of thick blood for a similar period, and next a. 


morsel of flesh for a similar period. Then, Allah sends an angel 
who is ordered to breathe life unto the fetus .»') 


() Fath ALBari 9 :379, Muslim 2:1122. 
[2] Fath ALBari 13 :449, Muslim 4 :2036. 


658 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


So, these are four months and ten more days to be sure, as 
some months are less (than thirty days), and the fetus will 
then start to show signs of life after the soul has been 
breathed into it. Allah knows best. 


The ‘Iiddah of the Slave Mother whose Master dies 


We should state here that the Jddah of the slave mother is 
the same in the case of death, as the ‘Iddah of the free 
woman. Imam Ahmad reported that ‘Amr bin Al-‘As said, “Do 
not confuse the Sunnah of our Prophet for us. The ‘TIddah of 
the mother, who is also a servant, when her master dies, is 
four months and ten nights.”!!! 


Mourning is required during the Iddah of Death 
Allah said: 


faces 


ae 
<...then when they have fulfilled their term, there is no sin on 
you if they (the wives) dispose of themselves in a (just and) 
honorable manner (i.e., they can marry). And Allah is well- 
acquainted with what you do.> 


This Ayah indicates that mourning for the dead husband is 
required until the Jddah is finished. It is also reported in the 
Two Sahihs that Umm Habibah and Zaynab bint Jahsh 
narrated that Allah’s Messenger 3 said: 

we Vy 98 35 oe te BS ol 2 63d ay SS AAY be 
Wt is not lawful for a woman who believes in Allah and the 
Last Day to mourn for more than three days for any dead 
person except her husband, for whom she mourns for four 
months and ten days .0!?! 

It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Umm Salamah said 
that a woman said, “O Messenger of Allah! My daughter’s 
husband died and she is complaining about her eye, should 


(1 Ahmad 4:302, Abu Dawud 2:370, Ibn Majah 1:673. 
[2] Fath AL-Bari 9 :394, Muslim 2:1123. 


Stirah 2. Al-Baqarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 659 


we administer kohl in her eye?” He said, “No,” several times 
upon repeating this question. He then said: 


tz E55 Ghetaht 3 Bsisy Ce aig hey LEE bal os ip 


Ut is four months and ten (nights)! During the Jahiliyyah, one 
of you would mourn for an entire year.» 


Zaiynab the daughter of Umm Salamah said (about the pre- 
Islamic era of ignorance), “When the woman’s husband died, 
she would go into seclusion and would wear the worst clothes 
she has. She would refrain from wearing perfume or any 
adornments until a year passed. She would then come out of 
seclusion and would be given dung that she would throw. 
Then an animal would be brought out, a donkey, a sheep, or a 
bird. Then some blood would be drained from it, usually 
resulting in its death.” 

In short, the mourning required from a wife whose husband 
dies, includes not using beautification aids, such as wearing 
perfume and the clothes and jewelry that encourage the men 
to seek marriage from the woman. All widows must observe 
this period of mourning whether they are young, old, free, 
servant, Muslim or disbeliever, as the general meaning of the 
Ayah indicates. 

Allah also said: 


54h Ah iy> 
¢...then when they have fulfilled their term> 


meaning, when the ‘Iddah finishes, according to Ad-Dahhak 
and Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas. 


tke CR > 


there is no sin on you> Az-Zuhri said, “Meaning her Wali 
(guardian).” 


435 ad 
<if they (the wives) dispose> 


meaning, the women whose ‘Iddah has finished. Al-‘Awfi said 
that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “If the woman is divorced or if her 


0) Muslim 2:1124, 


660 . Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


husband dies and then her ‘Iddah term ends, there is no sin 
that she beautifies herself, so that she becomes ready for 
marriage proposals. This is the way ‘that is just and 
honorable’. ” It was reported that Muqatil bin Hayyan gave the 
same explanation.) Ibn Jurayj related that oe said: 


Cigitl Sal g oleh cg Keb Cet 5 
¢...there is no sin on you if they (the ne dispose of 
themselves in a just and honorable manner. 


“refers to allowed and pure (honorable) marriage.”7! It was 
also reported that Al-Hasan, Az-Zuhri and As-Suddi said the 
same.!) 


oe AN g BE FI oe oy Loe a KE Ot HD 
3ai2 Ippo Vj Uist $$ Ys SI Sy Saude Y ly SE: st 
APAHS PAT Kil gu AG al fee A cisit (io S ces 

. qr We wa oge a 3 
235. And there is no sin on you if you make a hint of 
betrothal or conceal it in yourself, Allah knows that you will 
remember them, but do not make a promise (of contract) with 
them in secret except that you speak an honorable saying. And 
do not be determined on the marriage bond until the term 
prescribed is fulfilled. And know that Allah knows what is in 


your minds, so fear Him. And know that Allah is Oft- 
Forgiving, Most Forbearing .> 


Mentioning Marriage indirectly during the ‘Iddah 
Allah said: 
45k ce i> 
<And there is no sin on you> 


meaning, to indirectly mention marriage to the widow during 
the term of ‘ddah for her deceased husband. Ath-Thawri, 
Shu'bah and Jarir stated that Tbn ‘Abbas said: 


(1 Ibn Abi Hatim'2:812,813, 1:813. 
2] At-Tabari 5:93. 
{31 Ibn Abi Hatim 2:814. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 661 
CS hs be oy Abe a KE At TD 
<And there is no sin on you if you make a hint of betrothal> 


“means saying, I want to marry and I am looking for a woman 
whose qualities are such and such,’ thus talking to her in 
general terms in a way that is better.” In another narration (by 
Tbn ‘Abbas), “Saying, ‘I wish that Allah endows me with a wife,’ 
but he should not make a direct marriage proposal." —Al- 
Bukhari reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that the Ayah: 
45 CS be ey ASK Ka KEE UE Tp 
¢And there is no sin on you if you make a hint of betrothal> 

means, “The man could say, 1 wish to marry,’ 1 desire a wife,’ 
or, I wish I could find a good wife’.”!?!_ Mujahid, Tawas, 
‘Tkrimah, Sa‘id bin Jubayr, Ibrahim An-Nakhai, Ash-Shabi, 
Al-Hasan, Qatadah, Az-Zuhri, Yazid bin Qusayt, Muqatil bin 
Hayyan and Al-Qasim bin Muhammad"! and several others 
among the Salaf and the Imams said that one is allowed to 
mention marriage indirectly to the woman whose husband 
died. 

It is also allowed to indirectly mention marriage to a woman 
who had gone through final, irrevocable divorce. The Prophet 
#% ordered Fatimah bint Qays to remain in the house of Ibn 
Umm Maktum for ddah when her husband Abu ‘Amr bin Hafs 
divorced her for the third time. He said to her: 


‘ «Inform me when your ‘Iddah term ends.» 


When she finished the ‘Iddah, Usamah bin Zayd, the 
Prophet’s freed slave asked to marry her, and the Prophet 3% 
married her to him.'*! As for the divorced wife (not irrevocably 
divorced), there is no disagreement that it is not allowed for 
other than her husband to mention marriage proposals to her 
directly or indirectly (before the ‘Iddah finishes). Allah knows 
best. 


") At-Tabari 5:95, 96. 

2) Fath AL-Bari 9:84. 

(3) bn Abi Hatim 2:817,818 
(4) Muslim 2:1114. 


662 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Allah said: 
KA g HEE 
¢...or conceal it in yourself,» meaning, if you hide the intention 
of seeking marriage with them. Similarly, Allah said: 
CRONE UG pide GU Ae ind 
¢And your Lord knows what their breasts conceal, and what 
they reveal> (28:69) and: 
2 by Al El Up 
¢...while I am All-Aware of what you conceal and what you 
reveal .> (60: 1) So, Allah said here: 
iii KS cit ep 


€Allah knows that you will remember them> meaning, in your 
hearts, so He made it easy for you. Allah then said: 


ii, Ssdel3 Y SI5> 
«...but do not make a promise (of contract) with them in 
secret> 
‘Ali bin Abu Talhah reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said that 


€i0 Sastel> Y 55> 
<but do not make a promise (of contract) with them in secret> 


means do not say to her, “I am in love (with you),” or, 
“Promise me you will not marry someone else (after the ‘Iddah 
finishes),” and so forth.''"! Sa‘tid bin Jubayr, Ash-Sha‘bi, 
Tkrimah, Abu Ad-Duha, Ad-Dahhak, Az-Zuhri,'?! Mujahid and 
Ath-Thawri said that it (meaning of the Ayah) means taking 
the woman’s promise not to marry someone else.'*! 

Afterwards, Allah said: 


digs $5 UE SD 
¢...except that you speak an honorable saying .> 


(1 At-Tabari 5:107. 
[21 thn Abi Hatim 2:821. 
(3) At-Tabari 5:109. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 663 


Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, Said bin Jubayr,''! As-Suddi, Ath- 
Thawri and Ibn Zayd said that the Ayah means to indirectly 
refer to marriage, such as saying, “I desire someone like 
you.”?1 Muhammad bin Sirin said: I asked Ubaydah about 
the meaning of Allah’s statement: 


dis BE AWD 
¢...except that you speak an honorable saying .> 


He said, “He says to her Wali, ‘Do not give her away (in 
marriage) until you inform me first’.” This statement was 
narrated by Ibn Abu Hatim.!*! 

Allah then said: 


G55 Lagi Ge HH Ea F5i2 1,5 i> 


7 7 


¢And do not be determined on the marriage bond until the term 
prescribed is fulfilled > 


meaning, do not make marriage contracts before the ‘Iddah 
finishes. Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, Ash-Sha‘bi, Qatadah, Ar-Rabi‘ 
bin Anas, Abu Malik, Zayd bin Aslam, Mugatil bin Hayyan, 
Az-Zuhri, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani, As-Suddi, Ath-Thawri and Ad- 
Dahhak said that: 


CAN cisit he Sp 
quntil the term prescribed is fulfilled .> 
means, ‘Do not consummate the marriage before the ‘ddah 
term finishes.”*! The scholars agree that marriage contracts 


during the ‘Iddah are invalid. 
Allah then said: 


CiSib Kal g voy dt eiep 
€And know that Allah knows what is in your minds, so fear 
Him.> 


warning the men against the ideas they conceal in their hearts 
about women, directing them to think good about them rather 


"! Ibn Abi Hatim 2 :824. 

[2] At-Tabari 5:114. 

(3! ibn Abi Hatim 2:826. 

(*] Ibn Abi Hatim 2:828,829. 


664 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


than the evil, and Allah woule not let them despair of His 
mercy, as He said: 


ee tse fe aC a 
<And know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing .> 


., - Ge 23s z “ ycat Pest ee 
eed be Beds te) IGE IBS dc A A oy Ke ee yp 
. qq Fes ytd CE 8 Gk 45 Gi 


236. There is no sin on you, if you divorce women while yet 
you have not touched them, nor appointed for them their due 
(dowry). But give them a Mut‘ah (a suitable gift, the rich 
according to his means, and the poor according to his means, a 
gift of reasonable amount is a duty on the doers of good.> 


Divorce before consummating the Marriage 


Allah allowed divorce after the marriage contract and before 
consummating the marriage. Ibn ‘Abbas, Tawts, Ibrahim and 
Al-Hasan Al-Basri said that ‘touched’ (mentioned in the Ayah) 
means sexual intercourse.''!! The husband is allowed to 
divorce his wife before consummating the marriage or giving 
the dowry if it was deferred. 


The Mut‘ah (Gift) at the time of Divorce 


Allah commands the husband to give the wife (whom he 
divorces before consummating the marriage) a gift of a 
reasonable amount, the rich according to his means and the 
poor according to his means, to compensate her for her loss. 
Al-Bukhari reported in his Sahih that Sahl bin Sa‘d and Abu 
Usayd said that Allah’s Messenger #4 married Umaymah bint 
Sharahil. When she was brought to the Prophet # he extended 
his hand to her, but she did not like that. The Prophet # then 
ordered Abu Usayd to provide provisions for her along with a 
gift of two garments. (2 : ae 


a Xi Ae 35 GC has i iia 4 peas a Saye of A . ot Ghoul > 
a me F 35 OSG ary | As of a cea 3532 “90 eit nr 3 Zh 
(1) tpn Abi Hatim 2:831. 
[2] Fath ALBari 9 :269. 


Surah 2. Al-Baqarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 665 


€237. And if you divorce them before you have touched (had a 
sexual relation with) them, and you have appointed for them 
their due (dowry), then pay half of that, unless they (the 
women) agree to remit it, or he (the husband), in whose hands 
is the marriage tie, agrees to remit it. And to remit is nearer to 
At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness). And do not forget liberality 
between yourselves. Truly, Allah is All-Seer of what you do.> 


The Wife gets half of Her Mahr if She is divorced before 
the Marriage is consummated 


This honorable Ayah is not a continuation of the Mut‘ah (gift) 
that was mentioned in the previous Ayah ({i.e., divorce before 
the marriage is consummated). This Ayah (2:237) requires the 
husband to relinquish half of the appointed Mahr if he 
divorces his wife before the marriage is consummated. If it was 
discussing any other type of gift, then it would have been 
mentioned that way, especially when this Ayah follows the 
previous Ayah related to this subject. Allah knows best. Giving 
away half of the bridal-money in this case is the agreed 
practice according to the scholars. So, the husband pays half 
of the appointed Mahr if he divorces his wife before 
consummating the marriage. 


Allah then said: 
435 SI V> 
qunless they (the women) agree to remit it,> 


meaning, the wife forfeits the dowry and relieves the husband 
from further financial responsibility. As-Suddi said that Abu 
Salih mentioned that Ibn ‘Abbas commented on Allah’s 
statement: 


dons A Vp 
qunless they (the women) agree to remit it,> 
“Unless the wife forfeits her right.”'! Furthermore, Imam Abu 


(I Ibn Abi Hatim 2:839. 


666 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Muhammad bin Abu Hatim said that it was reported that 
Shurayh, Said bin Musayyib, Ikrimah, Mujahid, Ash-Sha‘bi, 
Al-Hasan, Nafi‘, Qatadah, Jabir bin Zayd, ‘Ata’ Al-Khurasani, 
Ad-Dahhak, Az-Zuhri, Mugqatil bin Hayyan, Ibn Sirin, Ar-Rabi' 
bin Anas and As-Suddi said similarly.!! 

Allah then said: 


46a Fi oe lt hs 


¢...or he (the husband), in whose hands is the marriage tie, 
agrees to remit it.> 


Ibn Abu Hatim reported that ‘Amr bin Shu‘ayb said that his 
grandfather narrated that the Prophet 3% said: 


e553 ce 3k hE 
«The husband is he who has the marriage tie.0'?! 

Ibn Marduwyah also reported this Hadith, and it is the view 
chosen by Ibn Jarir. The Hadith states that the husband is 
the person who really holds the marriage tie in his hand, as it 
is up to him to go on with the marriage or end it. On the 
other hand, the Wali of the wife is not allowed to give away 
any of her rightful dues without her permission, especially the 
dowry. 

Allah then stated: 


€65y PN GS oS 
¢And to remit it is nearer to At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness) .> 
Ibn Jarir said, “Some scholars said that this statement is 
directed at both men and women.” Ibn ‘Abbas said: 
ssi TAS old 
¢And to remit it is nearer to At-Taqwa (piety, righteousness) .> 


indicates that the one who forgives, is nearer to At-Taqwa 
(piety).""! A similar statement was made by Ash-Sha‘bi and 
several other scholars. 

Mujahid, An-Nakhai, Ad-Dahhak, Mugatil bin Hayyan, Ar- 


(] tpn Abi Hatim 2 :840-842. 
[21 ibn Abi Hatim 2 :842. 
(3) At-Tabari 5 :162. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2 667 
rere Rabi‘ bin Anas and 
-%, Goss Jel 4, ws Thawri stated that 


a ‘liberality’ mentioned 
USS AV e -2as58 a Gow |] in the Ayah refers to 
e ae Soe -- ||the woman giving 
seers Jay y sc 3&8 Py al PA a4 Be 4 
pA GS SG DE Len cles cai oooh away her half Mahr, 
fs ovis fae ob eee e 7 eS lor the man givin 
Aeog leg 9) 298 oe rly (EB giving 
sy aa | away the full Mar 
SP obGl Le Syd S laes ag thie is why Allah said 
AR: 9047 te A ere: 
ot Erg th lS ge Seale HCA ae ee 
Sates le is . rary ae aor oh Bee J; 
Metis Oaeashpabyse | tee Sp 
¢And do not forget 
liberality between 


2 COP gx Leste re Sele pet 
CONS OD Oe ea 
7 cde 


- “¢ 4 o Seten eae “42% 
Hale Salas LS <sile aad “al yourselves .> 


Bick | (Ate | Ba Fae ted meaning, kindness (or 
pyllote SH o8 aprme tae ae generosity), as Sa‘id 
ELBA AGASSI IG |] has stated. alah 
i said: 
es OMS KK, Gl E> 


nee aa ier ona ares a: ai <Truly, Allah is All- 
Gi rddaeeal oe sail eae Seer of what you do.> 
ps5 A hess BEGG: te meaning, none of 
your affairs ever 
escapes His perfect 
Watch, and He will reward each according to his deeds. 


TVG Bis OF MeSeS iy Rost pics oskat fe ies 
pea? (313% Ft be re ee tetice 2 fac He 

CN Syl SG PE Sack OF di eit Aut ys Oy 

€238. Guard strictly (five obligatory) As-Salawat (the prayers) 


especially the Middle Salah. And stand before Allah with 
obedience .> 


€239. And if you fear (an enemy), (perform Salah) on foot or 
riding. And when you are in safety, then remember Allah 
(pray) in the manner He has taught you, which wou knew not 


1) At-Tabari 5:165,166. 
[2] At-Tabari 5:166. 


668 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
(before) .> 

Allah commands that the prayer should be performed 

properly and'on time. It is reported in the Two Sahihs that Ibn 


Mas‘id said, “I asked the Prophet #%, ‘Which deed is the 
dearest (to Allah)?’ He replied: 


tds Olé SEI 
_ ¢To offer the prayers at their fixed times.» 
I asked, ‘What is the next (in goodness)?’ He replied: 


tah Joos od Siglo | 
‘To participate in Jihad (religious fighting) in Allah's cause.»” 
I again asked, ‘What is the next (in goodness)?’ He replied: 
tAligh bs 
_ To be. good and dutiful to your parents.» 


‘Abdullah then added, “The Prophet #% told me these words, 
and had I asked more, the Prophet 3 would have told me 
more.”!!) a 


The Middle Prayer 


Furthermore, Allah has specifically mentioned the Middle 
prayer, which is the ‘Asr prayer according to the majority of 
the scholars among the Companions, as At-Tirmidhi and Al- 
Baghawi have stated. Al-Qadi Al-Mawardi added that the 
majority of the scholars of the Tabi‘in also held this view. Al- 
Hafiz Abu Umar bin ‘Abdul-Barr said that this is also the 
opinion of the majority of the scholars of the Athadr {i.e., the 
Hadith and the statements of the Salaf). In addition, Abu 
Muhammad bin ‘Atiyah said that this is the Tafsir (of the 
Middle prayer) of the majority: of scholars. Al-Hafiz Abu 
Muhammad ‘Abdul-Mu’min bin Khalaf Ad-Dumyati stated in 
his book on the Middle prayer that it is the ‘Asr prayer and 
mentioned that this is the Tafsir of ‘Umar, ‘Ali, Ibn Mas‘tid, 
Abu Ayyub, ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr, Samurah bin Jundub, Abu 
Hurayrah, Abu Said, Hafsah, Umm Habibah, Umm Salamah, 
Ibn ‘Abbas and ‘Aiishah. This is also the Tafsir of Ubaydah, 


Hl Fath ALBari 2:12, Muslim 1:90. 


Stirah 2 Al-Baqarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 669 


Ibrahim An-Nakha‘, Razin, Zirr bin Hubaysh, Sa‘id bin 
Jubayr, Tbn Sirin, Al-Hasan, Qatadah, -Ad-Dahhak, Al-Kalbi, 
Mugaitil, Ubayd bin Abu Maryam, and others. om 


The Proof that the ‘Asr Prayer is the Middle Prayer 
Imam Ahmad reported that ‘Ali narrated that Allah’s 
Messenger 2 said during the battle of AlAhzab (the 
Confederates): es 


SG asks pes SI So padi phe yhog Sa oF re 
‘They (the disbelievers) busied us from'performing the Middle 


‘prayer, the “Asr prayer, may Allah fill their hearts and houses 
with fire.» : 


Two Shaykhs, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi An-Nasa7! and 
several ‘other collectors of the Sunan recorded this Hadith 
using different chains of narrators to ‘aii.31 The Hadith about 
the battle of AlLAhzadb, when the Mushriks prevented Allah’s 
Messenger # and his Companions from performing the ‘Asr 
prayer, has been narrated by several other Companions. We 
only mentioned the narrations that stated that the Middle 
prayer is the ‘Asr prayer. Furthermore, Muslim reported similar 
wordings for this Hadith from Ibn Mas‘id and Al-Bara’ bin 
‘Azib.'*1 

In addition, Imam Ahmad reported that Samurah bin 
Jundub said that Allah’s Messenger # said: Ge te” 


tail ie jae jt dhe 
«The Middle prayer is the ‘Asr prayer 0°! 


In another narration, Allah’s Messenger # mentioned: 


oe eee ee 
(11 Ahmad 1:113. 
[2] Muslim 1:437, An-Nasa’i 6 :303. 


3) path AlLBari 6:124, 7:467, 8:43, 11:197, Muslim 1:436, Abu 
Dawud 1:287, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 8 :328, An-Nasa’i 1:236, Ahmad 
1:137. Pe 


(4) Muslim 1 :437,438. 
(5) aAnmad 5:22. 


670 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
. 
thst BG oscar & thax 


€Guard strictly (five obligatory) As-Salawat (the prayers) especially 
the Middle Salah> and Stated that it is the ‘Asr prayer!) th 


weal ce 
Ut is the ‘Asr prayer.» 
and Ibn Jafar mentioned that the Prophet #5 was then being 
asked about the Middle prayer.) At-Tirmidhi reported this 
Hadith and said, "Hasan, Sahih." In addition, Abu Hatim bin 
Hibban reported in his Sahih that ‘Abdullah said that Allah’s 
Messenger 3% said: 


tadlite she Jt isioe 
‘The Middle prayer is the ‘Asr prayer .0\4l 

At-Tirmidhi reported that Ibn Mas‘id narrated that Allah’s 

Messenger # said: 
taal isis shes ii fice 
‘The “Asr prayer is the Middle prayer.» 

At-Tirmidhi then stated that this Hadith is of a Hasan, Sahih 
type.) Muslim reported the Hadith in his Sahih and his 
wordings are: 

taal ste vhs ht sien oe Ula 
“They (disbelievers) busied us from performing the Middle 
prayer, the ‘Asr prayer vl 


authentic Hadith, Allah’s Messenger 3% emphasized the 
necessity of preserving the ‘Asr prayer, when he said, as Ibn 
‘Umar narrated: 


(1) Ahmad 5:8. 

[2] Ahmad 5:7, 

) Tubfat ALAhwadhi 8-328. 
41 thn Hibban 3-121. 

Il Tuhfat AlLAhwadhi 8 :329. 
6] Muslim 1 :437,. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 671 
eBay at 35 UES pec isle kG tan 
«Whoever misses the ‘Asr prayer will be like who has lost his 
family and money .»""| 
It is reported in the Sahih that Buraydah bin Al-Husayb said 
that the Prophet x said: 
is bs 8. eal irio 33 GE a egg plate iy 


‘On a cloudy day, perform the (‘Asr) prayer early, for whoever 
misses the ‘Asr prayer, will have his (good) deeds annulled .»!2! 


The Prohibition of speaking during the Prayer 
Allah said: 
45035 33 ifs9> 
¢And stand before Allah with obedience .> 
meaning, with humbleness and humility before Him (i.e., 
during the prayer). This command indicates that it is not 
allowed to speak during the prayer, as speaking contradicts 
the nature of the prayer. This is why the Prophet #% refused to 


answer Ibn Mas‘td when he greeted him while he was praying 
and said afterwards: 


OK pla 3 Sp 
‘The prayer makes one sufficiently busy .s!°| 


(i.e., by the various actions of the body, tongue and heart 
involved during the prayer.) 

Muslim reported that the Prophet #% said to Mu‘awiyah bin 
Hakam As-Sulami when he spoke during the prayer: 


SSNS GoD ge OL Ol OS ty 838 ea Ale ¥ Blas wd bp 
dbl 5535 
‘The ordinary speech people indulge in is not appropriate 


during the prayer. The prayer involves only Tasbih (praising 
Allah), Takbir (saying Allahu Akbar, i.e., Allah is the Most 


11] Muslim 1 :436. 
21 thn Majah 1:224. 
131 Muslim 1:382. 


672 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Great) and remembering Allah .»'"! 


Imam Ahmad reported that Zayd bin Arqam said, “One used 
to address his ‘friend about various affairs during the Biever 
Then when this Ayah was revealed: 


45535 a igo> 
¢And stand before Allah with obedience.> 


we were ordered to refrain from speaking.”?! The Group!*! 
(i.e., the Hadith collections), except Ibn Majah, “Teported this 
Hadith. oe 8 


The Fear Prayer 
Allah said: 
Bs J UG tals US aif Wens6 2 pao TS ts Ff Vey shiz b> 
EGG 


~ And if you fear (an enn), pia Salah) on foot or riding. 

And when you are in safety, then remember Allah (pray) in the 

manner He-has taught you, which you knew not (before) .> 

After Allah commanded His servants to perform the prayer 
perfectly and emphasized this commandment, He mentioned 
the situation where the person might not be able to perform 
the prayer perfectly, during battle and combat. Allah said: 
46053 FG Stes Sd 

¢And if you fear (an enemy), perform Salah on foot or riding .> 
meaning, pray in the appropriate manner under these 
circumstances, whether on foot or riding and whether facing 
the Qiblah or otherwise. Imam Malik reported that Nafi‘ related 
that Ibn ‘Umar used to describe the Fear prayer when he was 
asked about it and would then add, “If there is intense fear, 


pray on foot, riding, facing the Qiblah and otherwise.” Nafi‘ 
commented, “I think that he related that to the pPrppbes 4) 


1] Muslim 1:381. 

[2] Ahmad 4:368. 

(31 Fath Al-Bari 3:88, Muslilm 1:383, Abu Dawud 1:583, Tuhfat Al- 
Ahwadhi 8 :330, An-Nasa7 3:18. 

(41 4LMuwatta’ 1:184. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 673 


Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported the Hadith.! 

Muslim, Abu Dawud, An-Nasai, Ibn Majah and Ibn Jarir 
reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Allah has ordained the prayer 
by the words of your Prophet #%: four (Rak‘ah) while residing, 
two Rak‘ah while traveling and one Rak‘ah during times of 
fear." This is also the view of Al-Hasan Al-Basri, Qatadah, 
Ad-Dahhdak, and others.!*! 

In addition, Al-Bukhari has entitled a Chapter: ‘Prayer while 
confronting the Forts and facing the Enemy’. Al-Awzai said, “If 
the victory seems near and the Muslims are unable to perform 
the prayer (in the normal manner), they should pray by 
nodding each by himself. If they are unable to nod, they 
should delay the prayer until fighting is finished. When they 
feel safe, they should pray two Rak‘ah. If they are unable, they 
should then pray one Rak‘ah that includes two prostrations. If 
they are unable, then Takbir alone does not suffice, so they 
should delay the prayer until they are safe.” This is the same 
view that Makhul held. Anas bin Malik said, “I participated in 
the attack on the fort of Tastar, when the light of dawn started 
to become clear. Suddenly, the fighting raged and the Muslims 
were unable to pray until the light of day spread. We then 
prayed (the Dawn prayer) with Abu Musa and we became 
victorious. I would not have been pleased if I were to gain in 
the life of this world and whatever is in it instead of that 
prayer.”“! This is the wording of Al-Bukhari. 


Prayer during the Times of Peace is performed normally 
Allah said: 
qait (2036 add TS> 
€And when you are in safety, then remember Allah (pray)> 
meaning, ‘Perform the prayer as I have commanded you by 
completing its bowing, prostration, Standing, sitting, and with 
the required attention (in the heart) and supplication.’ Allah 
said: 
(1 Fath ALBGri 8:46, Muslim 1:574. 
(2) Muslim 1 :478 479, Abu Dawud 2:40, An-Nasaii 3:169, Ibn Majah 
1:339, At-Tabari 5: 247. 
3! At-Tabari 5:240,241. 
41 Fath Al-Bari 2:503. 


674 ____ Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
4p KS IU hack SY 


¢in the manner He has taught you, which you knew not 


(before) .> 


meaning, just as He has endowed you, guided you and taught 
you about what benefits you in this life and the Hereafter, so 
thank and remember Him. Similarly, Allah said after He 
mentioned the prayer of Fear, 

AGRE CS Coit & Sk Gat 4 Tit Lab start spp 
¢...but when you are free from danger, perform As-Salah. 
Verily, As-Salah (the prayer) is enjoined on the believers at 
fixed hours.> (4:103) 


We will mention the Hadiths about the prayer of Fear and its 
description in Strat An-Nisd’ while mentioning Allah’s 
statement: 


ificast (5 SE os ES 1545p 

<When you (O Messenger Muhammad 3) are among them, 

and lead them in As-Salah (the prayer).> (4:102) 

fey Fb gall Sy Ol age Seg UST oS) poe SS Sal 

“iL OS seed Be at GS cSt ees 
Cone Sa SAS ces peal 

€240. And those of you who die and leave behind wives should 

bequeath for their wives a year’s maintenance (and residence) 

without turning them out, but if they (wives) leave, there is no 

sin on you for that which they do of themselves, provided it is 


honorable (e.g., lawful marriage). And Allah is All-Mighty, 
All-Wise .> 


4241. And for divorced women, maintenance (should be 
provided) on reasonable (scale). This is a duty on Al-Muttagin 
(the pious) .> 

4242. Thus Allah makes clear His Ayat (Laws) to you, in order 
that you may understand .> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagqarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) _ 675 


Ayah (2:240) was abrogated 


The majority of the scholars said that this Ayah (2:240) was 
abrogated by the Ayah (2:234), what Allah said: 


aad 
a7"8g 5 


40585 al Sh a> 
€...they (the wives) shall wait (as regards their marriage) for 
four months and ten days.> (2:234) 


For instance, Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn Az-Zubayr said: I 
said to ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan: 


46S A855 chews EE Satsp 
¢And those of you who die and leave wives behind them> 


was abrogated by the other Ayah (2:234). Therefore, why did 
you collect it (meaning, in the Qur'an)?” He said, “O my 
nephew! I shall not change any part of the Qur'an from its 
place.”!!) 

The question that Ibn Az-Zubayr asked Uthman means: If 
the ruling of the Ayah (2:240) was abrogated to four months 
(the Iddah of the widow, and refer to 2:234), then what is the 
wisdom behind including it in the Qur’an, although its ruling 
has been abrogated? If the Ayah (2:240) remains (in the 
Qur’an) after the Ayah that abrogated it (2:234), this might 
imply that its ruling is still valid.’ ‘Uthman, the Leader of the 
faithful, answered him by Stating that this is a matter of the 
revelation, which mentioned these Ayat in this order. 
Therefore, I shall leave the Ayah where I found it in the 
Qur'an.’ 

Ibn Abu Hatim reported that Ibn ‘Abbas said about what 
Allah said: 


og ical ie Te Lae ry fc 3 erst cae ores 7 Fe, 
a de SL Re aged ie tail G05) (eae KBE SuI5> 

tal 
€And those of you who die and leave behind wives should 


bequeath for their wives a year’s maintenance (and residence) 
without turning them out,> 


“The widow used to reside, and have her provisions provided 


0) Fath ALBari 8:48. 


676 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


for her for a year, in her deceased husband’s house. Later, the 
Ayah that specified the inheritance (4:12) abrogated this Ayah 
(2:240), and thus the widow inherits one-fourth or one-eighth 
of what her (deceased) husband leaves behind.”!! 

Ibn Abu Hatim also related that ‘Ali bin Abu Talhah stated 
that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “When a man died and left behind a 
widow, she used to remain in his house for a year for her 
‘Iddah, all the while receiving her provisions during this time. 
Thereafter, Allah revealed this Ayah: 


iets al at Syl SS esi ods Ke ORE Snltg> 
¢And those of you who die and leave wives behind them, they 
(the. wives) shall wait (as regards their marriage) for four 
months and ten days.> (2:234) 


So, this is the ‘Iddah of the widow, unless she was pregnant, 
. for her ‘iddah then ends when she gives birth. Allah also said: 


Sa hh Hed Stee of WG A cee do EG BT > 

CFE be RU 
<In that which you leave, their (your wives’) share is a fourth if 
you leave no child; but if you leave a child, they get an eighth 
of that which you leave.> (4:12) 

So Allah specified the share of the widow in the inheritance 
and there was no need for the will or the Nafagah 
(maintenance) which were mentioned in (2:240).”71 

Ibn Abu Hatim stated that Mujahid, Al-Hasan, ‘Tkrimah, 
Qataddah, Ad-Dahhak, Ar-Rabi‘ and Muqatil bin Hayyan said 
that the Ayah (2:240) was abrogated by: 


iiss 2 aid 
four months and ten days. (2:234)!*) 
Al-Bukhari reported that Mujahid said that: 
€eiil 48s (Ke SE cald 

¢And those of you who die and leave wives behind them> 

(2:234) 
(! tpn Abi Hatim 2:871. 
(2) At-Tabari 5:255. 
3! bn Abi Hatim 2:875 876. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 677 


used to be the ‘ddah, and the widow had to remain with her 
(deceased) husband’s family (during that period, i.e., four 
months and ten days). Then, Allah revealed: 
BH) YN SOS SN 5 Ca atts cee, BY Slip 
tut oe Cell § OSU § pe CCR RE Of 
¢And those of you who die and leave behind wives should 
bequeath for their wives a year's maintenance (and residence) 
without turning them out, but if they (wives) leave, there is no 
sin on you for that which they do of themselves, provided it is 
honorable (e.g., lawful marriage) .> 
So, Allah made the rest of the year, which is seven months 
and twenty days, as a will and testament for her. 
Consequently, if she wants, she could use her right in this will 
and remain in the residence (for the rest of the year). Or, if 
she wants, she could leave the (deceased husband’s) house 
after the four months and ten days have passed. This is the 
meaning of what Allah said: 
Lake CL WH GEE 88 GE) Ted 
€...without turning them out, but if they (wives) leave, there is 
no sin on you.) 


Therefore, the required term of ‘Iddah is still unchanged 
{refer to 2:234). 

‘Ata’ quoted Ibn ‘Abbas, “This Ayah (2:240) has abrogated 
(the requirement that) the widow spends the ‘iddah with his 
(i.e., her deceased husband’s) family. So, she spends her 
‘Iddah wherever she wants. This is the meaning of what Allah 
said: 

del 
«without turning them out,>.” 

‘Ata’ also said: “If she wants, she spends the ‘Iddah with his 
family and resides there according to the will (meaning the 
rest of the year). If she wants, she is allowed to leave, for Allah 
said: 

€i5 eg Kee AES Sp 
<there is no sin on you for that which they do of themselves,>.” 


678 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


‘Ata’ then said: “Then (the Ayah on) the inheritance (refer to 
4:12) came and abrogated the residence. Hence, the widow 
spends her Iddah wherever she wants and does not have the 
right to residence any more.”!!! 

The statement of ‘Ata’ and those who held the view that the 
Ayah (2:240) was abrogated by the Ayah on the inheritance 
(4:12), is only valid for more than the four months and ten 
days (required in 2:234). However, if they mean that the four 
months and ten days are not required from the deceased 
husband’s estate, then this opinion is the subject of 
disagreement among the scholars. As proof, they said that the 
widow is required to remain in her (deceased) husband’s house 
(for four months and ten days) according to what Malik 
reported from Zaynab bint Ka‘b bin Ujrah. She said that 
Fari‘ah bint Malik bin Sinan, the sister of Abu Sa‘id Al-Khudri, 
told her that she came to Allah’s Messenger # asking him to 
return to her family’s residence with Banu Khudrah. Her 
husband had pursued some of his servants who ran away, but 
when he reached the area of Al-Qadiim, they killed him. She 
said, “So I asked Allah’s Messenger 3 if I should stay with my 
family in Banu Khudrah, for my (deceased) husband did not 
leave me a residence that he owns or Nafaqah (maintenance). 
Allah’s Messenger #% answered in the positive. While I was in 
the room, Allah’s Messenger #3 summoned me or had someone 
summon me and said: rene 

«What did you say?» : 
I repeated the story to him about my (deceased) husband. He 
said: 

abet Sus iy SS ke bg Yk 
«Stay at your home until the term reaches its end.» 

So I remained through the ‘ddah term for four months and 
ten days in my (deceased husband’s) house. Thereafter, 
‘Uthman bin ‘Affan sent for me during his reign and asked me 


about this matter and I told him what happened. He made a 
judgment to the same effect.”?! This Hadith was also collected 


1 Al-Bukhari 4531 ,5344. 
(21 ALMuwatta’ 2 :591. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 679 


by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa and Ibn Majah.!"! At- 
Tirmidhi said, "Hasan Sahih". 


The Necessity of the Mut‘ah (Gift) at the Time of Divorce 
Allah said: 
¢And for divorced women, maintenance (should be provided) on 
reasonable (scale). This is a duty on Al-Muttagin (the pious) .> 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Zayd bin Aslam said that when Allah’s 
statement: 


dicatit Fk Sys Lp 
€...a gift of reasonable amount is a duty on the doers of good> 
(2:236) 
was revealed, a man said, “If I want, I will be excellent and if I 
do not, I will not.” Thereafter, Allah revealed this Ayah: 
¢And for divorced women, maintenance (should be provided) on 
reasonable (scale). This is a duty on Al-Muttagin (the 
pious) ,>!?! 

The scholars who ruled that the Mut‘ah (reasonable gift) at 
the time of divorce is required for every divorced woman, 
whether she had a bridal-money appointed for her or not, and 
whether the marriage was consummated or not, relied on this 
Ayah (2:241) when they issued their ruling. This is the view 
taken on this subject by Said bin Jubayr and several others 
among the Salaf!*] and also Ibn Jarir. Hence, Allah’s 
statement: 


c 


geo be 


we se 344 £2 oF FP 405 fe Tenge Peete | ae re 
eel Je nes tes Oi 285 3 BAS Sic Cai Ai y Ke cet Yp 
dic alt FE ays OE BS 5 B65 5 
There is no sin on you, if you divorce women while yet you 
have not touched (had sexual relation with) them, nor appointed 


11 Abu Dawud 2:773, Tuhfat Al-Ahwadhi 4:319,390, An-Nasa7 
6:200, Ibn Majah 1 :654. 


21 At-Tabari 5:264. 
-I8! at-Tabari 5 :263. 


680 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


for them their due (dowry). But bestow on them (a suitable 
gift), the rich according to his means, and the poor according to 
his means, a gift of reasonable amount is a duty on the doers of 
good.» (2:236) only mentions some specifics of this 
general ruling. 


Allah then said: 


desk OES ue > 


sone 


<Thus Allah makes clear His Ayat (Laws) to you,> 


meaning, what He allows, forbids, requires, His set limits, His 
commandments and His prohibitions are all explained and 
made plain and clear for you. He did not leave any matter in 
general terms if you needed the specifics, 


aes Kip 
in order that you may understand .> 
meaning, understand and comprehend. 
oo Use Ail 248 OM it 55 SOT AS ats on ASE GST 55 ND 
Lybs Ft FAS SG WG dl oy Sect 
BH oH A MAE fe TT EG ST Le 9 


€243. Did you (O Muhammad 2%) not think of those who went 
forth from their homes in the thousands, fearing death? Allah 
said to them, ‘Die’. And then He restored them to life. Truly, 
Allah is full of bounty to mankind, but most men thank not.> 
<244. And fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is 
All-Hearer, All-Knower .> 

€245. Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan so that 
He may multiply it to him many times? And it is Allah that 
decreases or increases (your provisions), and unto Him you 
shall return .> 


Kos 1S 


The Story of the Dead People 


Ibn Abu Hatim related that Ibn ‘Abbas said that these people 
mentioned herein, were the residents of a village called 
Dawardan. ‘Ali bin ‘Asim said that they were from Dawardan, 


Sirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 681 


a village several miles away from WaAasit (in Iraq). 


In his Tafsir, Waki‘ bin Jarrah said that Ibn ‘Abbas 
commented, 


wt wie fk ote, re et oe 
ql 555 SM ts hats ot (ASE GMT SL 55 pil> 


<Did you (O Muhammad #3) not think of those who went forth 
from their homes in thousands, fearing death?» 


that they were four thousand persons who escaped the plague 
(that broke out in their land). They said, “We should go to a 
land that is free of death!” When they reached a certain area, 
Allah said to them: 


diny 
<Die.’"> 
and they all died. Afterwards, one of the Prophets passed by 


them and supplicated to Allah to resurrect them and Allah 
brought them back to life. So, Allah stated: 


+ 4 § ode 4 ot « ge an 
€555i 532 Sj aay pasts ot (ASS Gal dh 55 al> 


<Did you (O Muhammad 3) not think of those who went forth 
from their homes in the thousands, fearing death? 


Furthermore, several scholars among the Salaf said that 
these people were the residents of a city during the time of the 
Children of Israel. The weather in their land did not suit them 
and an epidemic broke out. They fled their land fearing death 
and took refuge in the wilderness. They later arrived at a 
fertile valley and they filled what is between its two sides. 
Then Allah sent two angels to them, one from the lower side 
and the other from the upper side of the valley. The angels 
screamed once and all the people died instantly, just as the 
death of one man. They were later moved to a different place, 
where walls and graves were built around them. They all 
perished, and their bodies rotted and disintegrated. Long 
afterwards, one of the Prophets of the Children of Israel, 
whose name was Hizqil (Ezekiel), passed by them and asked 
Allah to bring them back to life by his hand. Allah accepted 
his supplication and commanded him to say, “O rotted bones, 
Allah commands you to come together.” The bones of every 
body were brought together. Allah then commanded him to 


682 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


say, “O bones, Allah commands you to be covered with flesh, 
nerves and skin.” That also happened while Hizqil was 
watching. Allah then commanded him to say, “O souls, Allah 
commands you to return, each to the body that it used to 
inhabit.” They all came back to life, looked around and 
proclaimed, “All praise is due to You (O Allah!) and there is no 
deity worthy of worship except You.” Allah brought them back 
to life after they had perished long ago. 

We should state that bringing these people back to life is a 
clear proof that physical resurrection shall occur on the Day of 
Resurrection. This is why Allah said: 


Kt FE QS ot aif <)> 
€Truly, Allah is full of bounty to mankind,> 


meaning, in that He shows them His great signs, sound proofs 
and clear evidences. Yet, 


nied YAK FET SI) 
<but most men thank not.>"! 


as they do not thank Allah for what He has given them with in 
their worldly life and religious affairs. 

The story of the dead people (2:244 above) also indicates that 
no caution can ever avert destiny and that there is no refuge 
from Allah, but to Allah Himself. These people departed from 
their land fleeing the epidemic and seeking to enjoy a long life. 
What they earned was the opposite of what they sought, as 
death came quickly and instantaneously and seized them all. 

There is an authentic Hadith that Imam Ahmad reported 
that ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abbas said that ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab once 
went to Ash-Sham (Syria). When he reached the area of Sargh, 
he was met by the commanders of the army: Abu Ubaydah 
bin Jarrah and his companions. They told him that the plague 
had broken out in Ash-Sham. The Hadith then mentioned that 
‘Abdur-Rahm4an bin ‘Awf, who was away attending to some of 
his affairs, came and said, “I have knowledge regarding this 
matter. I heard Allah’s Messenger 3 say: 


Ital 8 Gaile ptaee UL de big LAIR 96 ty ABE Ua3h Su bp 
1) At-Tabari 5 :266. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 683 


we 


Ulf it (the plague) breaks out in a land that you are in, do not 
leave that land to escape from it. If you hear about it in a land, 
do not enter it.» 


‘Umar then thanked Allah and went back.''! This Hadith is 
also reported in the Sahihayn.!! 


Abandoning Jihdd does not alter Destiny 
Allah said: 


dw Ae fe SS GEG Si pat 4 55> 


€And fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is All- 
Hearer, All-Knower.> 


This Ayah indicates that just as caution does not alter 
destiny, abandoning Jihdd will neither bring the appointed 
term closer nor delay it. Rather, destiny and the appointed 
provisions are fixed and shall never be changed or altered, 
neither by addition nor deletion. Similarly, Allah said: 


AS of Syl peal & Uigs8 J 1S GBA css eeshy WS Sat> 


<(They are) the ones who said about their killed brethren while 
they themselves sat (at home): “If only they had listened to us, 
they would not have been killed.” Say: “Avert death from your 
own selves, if you speak the truth,’’> (3:168) 


Allah said: 
iG 1s Gl ESO dy GA 2 Sail CS 4 HED 
Ee git a Fh ash Sst Uk ws A 55 SiS 5 i gh 


<€They say: “Our Lord! Why have you ordained for us 
fighting? Would that you had granted us respite for a short 
period?” Say: “Short is the enjoyment of this world. The 
Hereafter is (far) better for him who fears Allah, and you shall 
not be dealt with unjustly even equal to the Fatila (a scalish 


1H Ahmad 1:194. 
[21 Fath ALBari 10:189,190, 12:361, Muslim 4:1740. 


684 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


thread in the long slit of a date stone). Wheresoever you may 

be, death will overtake you even if you are in fortresses built up 

strong and high!"’> (4:77, 78) 

Abu Sulayman, Khalid bin Al-Walid, the commander of the 
Muslim armies, the veteran among Muslim soldiers, the 
protector of Islam and the Sword of Allah that was raised 
above His enemies, said while dying, “I have participated in so- 
and-so number of battles. There is not a part of my body, but 
suffered a shot (of an arrow), a stab (of a spear) or a strike (of 
a sword). Yet, here I am, I die on my bed just as the camel 
dies! May the eyes of the cowards never taste sleep.” He, may 
Allah be pleased with him, was sorry and in pain because he 
did not die as martyr in battle. He was sad that he had to die 
on his bed!!! 


The Good Loan and its Reward 
Allah said: 
Cie GC SH fis es 15 BE Is aD 
Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan so that He 
may multiply it to him many times?> 


In this Ayah, Allah encourages His servants to spend in His 
cause. Allah mentioned this same Ayah in several other parts 
of His Glorious Qur’a4n. The Hadith that mentions that Allah 
descends (every night down on the nearest heaven to us when 
the last third of the night remains) states that Allah says: 


tel YS pane 3 Gat tn 
‘Who would give a loan to He Who is neither poor nor 
unjust ..v'2l 
Allah’s statement: 
dicen GC Syitp 
<He may multiply it to him many times>, is similar to His 
statement: 
8G BSF 3 ee ee Sa Ve ES at eg Si Sad all Jp 
Ol Tahdhib At-Tahdhib 3 :124. 
21 Muslim 758, Musnad Abu ‘Awanah 1:145. 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 685 


a 4 
We 7, Bd Bete oor 
425 3 Ae a Xe 


wae 7 4 oe “ at 4e¢ oe 

ISU 34% “, CHG 

: le re rie Pies ei <The likeness of those 
NS Sng bles ret ari fe who spend their wealth 


ws 
Ny 


in the way of Allah, is 
as the likeness of a grain 
(of corn); it grows seven 
ears, and each ear has a 
hundred grains. Allah 
gives manifold increase 
to whom He _ wills.> 
(2:261) 

We will mention 


NCI Ea chy Hie Ja 
Pear fy casatiactis 


Ebi tsus 


Sears 


Coe ited Maid 
NEC Se AISI 


i re fee cusegeae || this Ayah later on. 
tassalileyatcsiacs 9942 | allah then said: 


ass LoSl5 o Pine 67505155 a d ae 
Patt ase - 0A 
@r1- bi “att is Atel 3 
va A 4 To IG 
Bs \Ept SVE aad bar me par’ HI y) 
ve re od By, A~\ 
G42a5a 9 25 e otk a LAG 
Sy eps oa" 4 
Kats Epa 4 Ske GS 


Ont 2S ESI a5 48 


4h BH SG 


¢And it is Allah that 
decreases or increases 
(your provisions),> 
meaning, ‘Spend (in 
Allah’s cause) and do 
not be anxious.’ 
Certainly, Allah is the 
Sustainer Who 
increases or decreases 
the provisions to whomever He wills among His servants. Allah’s 
wisdom is perfect, and, 


4Sse5 i> 


¢and unto Him you shall return.» on the Day of Resurrection. 


4, ’ 


Ga OSs 28 HG es SG be we Ky i> 
NG Ghd vt al Cea hey ice HIG BI ym 3 
me oS i OCH Gos on A 155 di tg BG Ge, 

428) Suh Le G6 24s SUE VL SS dic 


€246. Have you not thought about the group of the Children of 
Israel after (the time of) Misa? When they said to a Prophet of 


686 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


theirs, “Appoint for us a king and we will fight in Allah's 
way.” He said, “Would you then refrain from fighting, if 
fighting was prescribed for you?’ They said, “Why should we 
not fight in Allah’s way while we have been driven out of our 
homes and our children (families have been taken as captives)?’ 
But when fighting was ordered for them, they turned away, all 
except a few of them. And Allah is All-Aware of the 
wrongdoers .> 


The Story of the Jews Who sought a King to be 
appointed over Them 


Mujahid said that the Prophet (mentioned in the Ayah 2:246 
above) is Shamwil (Samuel).!") Wahb bin Munabbih said: The 
Children of Israel remained on the straight path for a period of 
time after Moses. They then innovated in the religion and 
some of them even worshipped the idols. Yet, there were 
always Prophets sent among them who would command them 
to work righteous deeds, refrain from doing evil and who 
would rule them according to the commands of the Torah. 
When they (Israelites) committed the evil that they committed, 
Allah caused their enemies to overwhelm them, and many 
fatalities fell among them as a consequence. Their enemies 
also captured a great number of them, and took over large 
areas of their land. Earlier, anyone who would fight the 
Israelites would lose, because they had the Torah and the 
Tabit,'?| which they inherited generation after generation ever 
since the time of Moses, who spoke to Allah directly. Yet, the 
Israelites kept indulging in misguidance until some king took 
the Tabut from them during a battle. That king also took 
possession of the Torah, and only a few of the Israelites who 
memorized it remained. The prophethood halted among their 
various tribes and only a pregnant woman remained of the 
offspring of Lavi (Levi), in whom the prophethood still 
appeared. Her husband had been killed, so the Israelites kept 
her in a house so that Allah may give her a boy, who would be 
their Prophet. The woman also kept invoking Allah to grant 
her a boy. Allah heard her pleas and gave her a boy whom she 


0) At-Tabari 5:293. 
2) «The ark of the Covenant.” 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 687 


called ‘Shamwil’ meaning ‘Allah has heard my pleas.’ Some 
people said that the boy’s name was Sham‘tin (Simeon), which 
also has a similar meaning. 

As that boy grew, Allah raised him to be a righteous person. 
When he reached the age of prophethood, Allah revealed to 
him and commanded him to call (his people) to Him and to 
His Tawhid (Oneness). Shamwil called the Children of Israel 
(to Allah) and they asked him to appoint a king over them so 
that they could fight their enemies under his command. The 
kingship had also ended among them. Their Prophet said to 
them, “What if Allah appoints a king over you, would you 
fulfill your vow to fight under his command?” 


€5CG ts oe GI i155 i mg LE To a> 


<They said, “Why should we not fight in Allah’s way while we 
have been driven out of our homes and our children?’’> 


meaning, ‘After our land had been confiscated and our 
children had been taken from us?’ Allah said: 


kcal he SG 4G SLE Ny ls Scat Aye OF CD 
<But when fighting was ordered for them, they turned away, 


all except a few of them. And Allah is All-Aware of the 
wrongdoers> 


meaning, only a few of them kept their promise, but the 
majority abandoned Jihdd and Allah has full knowledge of 
them. 


wig or then Beh Ge oc A ong goo ce ee gy othc oat ute 
AE SKS STNG Be I A 2 5 iy BS 2 > 


224 3, We Syete re 2 fe ae il 204 sete ye ae 
A abt oy JG Quit i dae SS SS te, ah St Sy LE 


para tamed YES 


bs ih is 


» 2a % £ 


‘4 Pay ee tod ba 2 8, rt ? . Zyrer beice 
~~ Aga ey) aly ply asl 3 Asus phy 
iw) 2% 


€247. And their Prophet said to them, “Indeed Allah has 
appointed Talut (Saul) as a king over you.” They said, “How 
can he be a king over us when we are fitter than him for the 
kingdom, and he has not been given enough wealth.” He said: 
“Verily, Allah has chosen him above you and has increased him 
abundantly in knowledge and stature. And Allah grants His 
kingdom to whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient for His 


688 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


creatures’ needs, All-Knower .’’> 


When the Israelites asked their Prophet to appoint a king 
over them, he appointed Talut (Saul), who was then a soldier. 
But, Talat was not a descendant of the house of kings among 
them, which was exclusively in the offspring of Yahudha 
(Judah). This is why they said: 


Ce Bit TKS SP 


¢How can he be a king over usp meaning, how can he be the king 
for us, 


“ait oD Ge ce ate Bee ogee 
CMH is tae OS HS a, wa Si Jp 


<when we are fitter than him for the kingdom, and he has not been 
given enough wealth?) They said that Talat was also poor and 
did not have the wealth that justifies him being king. Some 
people stated that Talit used to bring water to the people, 
while others stated that his profession was dyeing skins. The 
Jews, thus, disputed with their Prophet while they were 
supposed to obey him and to say good words to him. 
Their Prophet answered them: 
¢ aie aks ail 31> 
€Verily, Allah has chosen him above you> 


meaning, ‘Allah chose Talit from amongst you while having 
better knowledge about him.’ Their Prophet stated, “I did not 
choose Talat to be your king on my own. Rather, Allah has 
commanded that upon your request.” Further: 


tel ll 3 LE py 
<...and has increased him abundantly in knowledge and 
stature .> 


meaning, Talat is more knowledgeable and honorable than 
you, and stronger and more patient during combat, and has 
more knowledge of warfare. In short, he has more knowledge 
and is stronger than you are. The king should have sufficient 
knowledge, be fair looking and should have a strong soul and 
body.’ He then said: 


CB 5 jeak gi bp 


¢And Allah grants His kingdom to whom He wills.> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 689 


meaning, Allah Alone is the Supreme Authority Who does what 
He wills and no one can ask Him about His actions, while 
they will be asked (about their actions by Him). This is 
because Allah has perfect knowledge, wisdom and kindness 
with His creation. Allah said: 


¢And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures’ needs, All- 
Knower.> 
meaning, His favor is encompassing and He grants His mercy 
to whom He wills. He also knows those who deserve to be 
kings and those who do not deserve it. 


Bes 4a SG ech A en eon hy 4s 24h Sua 
ys og Sy Kota 1 ahs beg ss Se os Gs gs fees 
€248. And their Prophet said to them: ‘Verily! The sign of His 
kingdom is that there shall come to you At-Tabut, wherein is 
Sakinah (peace and reassurance) from your Lord and a remnant 
of that which Miisa (Moses) and Hariin (Aaron) left behind, 
carried by the angels. Verily, in this is a sign for you if you are 
indeed believers .> 
Their Prophet then proclaimed, “The sign of the blessings of 
Talat’s kingship over you is that Allah will give you back the 
Tabut (wooden box) that has been taken from you.” Allah said: 
¢wherein is Sakinah from your Lord» 


meaning, peace (or grace) and reassurance. ‘Abdur-Razzaq 
stated that Qatadah said: 


dies a> 


wherein is Sakinah> 


means grace.''! In addition, Ar-Rabi‘ said that Sakinah means 
mercy. This is also the meaning given by Ibn ‘Abbas, as Al- 
‘Awfi narrated. 


1) ‘abdur-Razzaq 1:98. 


690 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
Allah then said: 


iS Sis As Se Bs Gs tasp 


€...and a remnant of that which Mtisa (Moses) and Harin 
(Aaron) left behind,> 


Ibn Jarir related that Ibn ‘Abbas said about this Ayah: 


CS bis wad Je Go es EGP 
€...and a remnant of that which Miisé (Moses) and Harin 
(Aaron) left behind,> 


Meaning, Moses’ staff and the remnants of the Tablets.!!! This 
is the same Tafsir of Qatadah, As-Suddi, Ar-Rabi‘ bin Anas 
and ‘krimah, who added, “And also the Torah.”?! ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq said that he asked Ath-Thawri about the meaning of, 


¢ fee eb Ae Ae, to Boer 
$i sp Jie wsye Jie vs Gs ant) 


¢...and a remnant of that which Miisé (Moses) and Harun 
(Aaron) left behind, > 


Ath-Thawri said, “Some said that it contained a pot of 
manna and the remnants of the Tablets, while some others 
said that it contained (Moses) staff and two shoes (and refer to 
20:12)."451 

Allah then said: 


CK AK Lad 
¢...carried by the angels.> 


Ibn Jurayj stated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The angels came 
down while carrying the Tabut between the sky and the earth, 
until they placed it before Talat while the people were 
watching.” As-Suddi said, “The Tabut was brought to Talut’s 
house, so the people believed in the prophethood of Sham‘in 
(Simeon) and obeyed Talut”!*! 

The Prophet then said: 


1) At-Tabari 5:331. 
1 At-Tabari 5 :331,332. 
3} At-Tabari 5:333. 
4} At-Tabari 5:335. 


Surah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 691 
€Verily, in this is a 
sign for you> 

testifying to my truth 
in what I was sent 


ooh lse < * sae Paid 
pea Leal Je sais Ie ics 


one wore he ww a 


FET bomen, : : 7h Yee 
As\a at tales C9958 path Aa pe Cyd gy 


Joes [2 165 Gast acre 9: with my 
DUB Vaal Se cet de a pel oe V1 : 

ee a: Saas Sail - otes prophethood, and my 
LMG aac ate <All SaaS EES 3-44 || command to you to 


obey Talut, 
dan} AST o> 
<if you are indeed 


believers.» in Allah 
and the Hereafter.” 


(fem Stage 2 Ae 
Bay 0B 23 Em gil lyase ; 


hae eet Ae AS ~ Ae Bee ehe 
Eta INS <02 m5 odled ly LAI; 


wat as “ne 


pol FE NNN | Se Ahi 230 ss cep 
Avtar se = SSeS g zo oe ck ee be 
Soci baths GY reall | oS as peat di oy 


wt 


eee et tele oe Aes ye 
Oe YD | rr tae area | 4\s 
a oye Tes ce 4 fede a 7 
ages HU alata I es 
A LORE ae P< ee 
so ail Fee 5. ey ad ats 
Se A te A ee et ae Sect 
se SE teh TS de fas 
rd 


te woe pow ee orl hoe 
BAAN Is aka le 


Lo 


és pee ote pnd Coty 
“22509 ESK r if 5 GL 
even obese gt a 


fto’ge oe tele £5, ee a a ¢ +7 ake ae ae 
‘aly il O54 spe 4 CN Nb 4 ot Ee al a oes ot 56 


4249. Then when Taliit set out with the army, he said: 
“Verily, Allah will try you by a river. So whoever drinks 
thereof, he is not of me; and whoever tastes it not, he is of me, 
except him who takes (thereof) in the hollow of his hand.” Yet, 
they drank thereof, all, except a few of them. So when he had 
crossed it (the river), he and those who believed with him, they 
said: “We have no power this day against Jaliit (Goliath) and 
his hosts.” But those who knew with certainty that they were 
going to meet Allah, said: “How often has a small group 
overcome a mighty host by Allah's leave?” And Allah is with 
As-Sabirin (the patient) .> 


692 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


Allah states that Talat, the king of the Children of Israel, 
marched forth with his soldiers and the Israelites who obeyed 
him. His army was of eighty thousand then, according to As- 
Suddi,'! but Allah knows best. Talat said: 


trent dt Lp 
<Verily, Allah will try you> 

meaning, He will test you with a river, which flowed between 
Jordan and Palestine, i.e., the Shari‘ah river, according to Ibn 
‘Abbas and others.!7! He continued, 

€i Fb Lt Gp 

€So whoever drinks thereof, he is not of me ;> 

meaning, shall not accompany me today, 


qand whoever tastes it not, he is of me, except him who takes 
(thereof) in the hollow of his hand .> 


meaning, there is no harm in this case. Allah then said: 
(4s GE BS 


<Yet, they drank thereof, all, except a few of them.> 


Ibn Jurayj stated that Ibn ‘Abbas commented, “Whoever 
took some of it (the river’s water) in the hollow of his hand, 
quenched his thirst; as for those who drank freely from it, 
their thirst was not quenched.” 

Ibn Jarir reported that Al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib said, “We used to 
say that the Companions of Muhammad 3% who accompanied 
him on the battle of Badr were more than three hundred and 
ten, just as many as the soldiers who crossed the river with 
Talat. Only those who believed crossed the river with him.”*! 
Al-Bukhari also reported this.'4! 

This is why Allah said: 

Kitts SNe pA GGL VIG da igen alo 8 ee CD 


(M At-Tabari 5 :339. 

[21 At-Tabari 5:340. 

(3! At-Tabari 5 :345,346,347. 
4] Fath AL-Bari 7 :339. 


Surah 2, Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 693 


4So when he had crossed it (the river), he and those who 
believed with him, they said: ‘We have no power this day 
against Jalut (Goliath) and his hosts.’’> : 

This Ayah indicates that the Israelites (who remained with 
Saul) thought that they were few in the face of their enemy 
who were many then. So, their knowledgeable scholars 
strengthened their resolve by stating that Allah’s promise is 
true and that triumph comes from Allah Alone, not from the 
large numbers or the adequacy of the supplies. They said to 
them: 


lee 


Cine Go U5 Sf git ie 2 SE AS pt oi Led 


<"How often has a small group overcome a mighty host by 
Allah’s leave?’ And Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient) .> 


Na SoS ee ee EL eG yt ney 1575 CI5> 
2325 ase 3i3 5 at ah panies {te Lapel aya de bts io {5 


wits 465 Gl af 5 VG ee LG isi at 
Al 2s Ob hil by ob al fen) AY oscil 
CK cast 55 ths Gl ae ose 

€250. And when they advanced to meet Jaliut eatiiiiy and his 
forces, they invoked: ‘Our Lord! Pour forth on us patience, 
and set firm our feet and make us victorious over the 
disbelieving people .”’> 

€251. So they routed them by Allah's leave and Dawud (David) 
killed Jalut (Goliath), and Allah gave him (Dawud) the kingdom 
[after the death of Talat and Samuel] and Al-Hikmah 
(prophethood), and taught him of that which He willed. And if 
Allah did not check one set of people by means of another, the 
earth would indeed be full of mischief. But Allah is full of 
bounty to the ‘Alamin (mankind, Jinn and all that exists) .> 
4252. These are the verses of Allah, We recite them to you (O 
Muhammad 3%) in truth, and surely, you are one of the 
Messengers (of Allah .> 

When the faithful party, who were few under the command 


of Talat, faced their enemy, who were many under the 
command of Jalut, 


694 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 
CS CE ENS Hip 
<they invoked: “Our Lord! Pour forth on us patience...‘’> 
meaning, send down patience on us from You. 
Cnt E55 > 
qand_ set firm our feet> 
meaning, against the enemy and save us from running away 
and from feebleness, 
Lipa 5B Se tas 
¢and make us victorious over the disbelieving people .> 
Allah said: 
€8h iy AGP 
<So they routed them by Allah's leave} 
meaning, they defeated and overwhelmed them by Allah’s aid 
and support. Then, 
42M sans SE5> 
gdand Dawud killed Jalit> 

Israelite accounts claimed that (Prophet) David killed Goliath 
with a slingshot that he had, which he launched at Goliath 
causing his death. 

Talut promised that whoever killed Jalut, would marry his 
daughter and would share his kingship and authority. He kept 
his promise. Later, the kingship was transferred to Prophet 
Dawud in addition to being granted Prophethood by Allah. So, 
Allah said: 

ROR Bl Sie 5 
¢...and Allah gave him (Dawud) the kingdom> 
that Talut had and, 
€25455 
qand Al-Hikmah> that comes with the prophethood, meaning, 
after Shamwil. [Allah then said:] 


ASL, KIE5> 


Stirah 2. Al-Bagarah (225 - 252) (Part-2) 695 


¢and taught him of that which He willed.» 
meaning, what He willed of the knowledge that He bestowed 
on (Prophet) Dawud. 
Next, Allah said: 


of; > oe fer yee oF 2" GF Ae 
4AM 25S pie, $55 SU af SRE. 


¢And if Allah did not check one set of people by means of 
another, the earth would indeed be full of mischief.> 


This Ayah indicates that if it were not for the fact that Allah 
checks one set of people with another, such as when Talut 
and the bravery of Dawud helped the Children of Israel 
(against Goliath), then people would have perished. Similarly, 
Allah said: 


Ub Sak Ses B52) GS Sah tt OT aT 2s GD 
tisk At si 
<For had it not been that Allah checks one set of people by 
means of another, monasteries, churches, synagogues, and 
Masjids, wherein the Name of Allah is mentioned much, would 
surely, have been pulled down.» (22:40) 
Allah then said: 


Can & pis 33 al Send5> 


<But Allah is full of bounty to the ‘Alamin (mankind, Jinn and 
all that exists)> 


meaning, by His mercy and favor He fixes some of them by 
some others. Surely, Allah has the wisdom, the supreme 
authority and the clear proof against His creation in all of His 
actions and statements. 
Allah said: 
Cae 65 ys BU, ike GSE AN tne Bhp 
<These are the verses of Allah, We recite them to you (O 
Muhammad #3) in truth, and surely, you are one of the 
Messengers (of Allah) .> 
This Ayah states, These Aydt (verses) of Allah that We have 
narrated for you in truth conform to the exact manner that 
these stories have occurred and to the truth that still remain 


696 Tafsir Ibn Kathir 


in the (Divine) Books that the scholars of the Children of Israel 
have and know. Allah said: O Muhammad, 


45> 
€you are> 
tens 5D 
¢one of the Messengers (of Allah)» emphatically Stating the truth 
of his prophethood741 


YW This is the End of Volume One with the Tafsir of Surat 
Al-Baqarah, verse. 252.. 


¥ Volume Two begins with Surat Al-Baqarah, verse. 253. 


Ww Ww Ww 


